There was a deep irony at the heart of the prime minister’s speech on increasing selection in the school system. She accused her predecessors of putting dogma and ideology before the interests of ordinary people in their failure to expand grammar schools. Yet the only arguments for a selective school system are themselves based on emotion, dogma and ideology. There is a wealth of evidence selection works against the working-class families May claimed will be at the heart of her government’s agenda.

There are serious problems in the English school system. Social background remains a much stronger predictor of how children do at school than in top-performing countries such as Canada, Finland and Korea. A much larger proportion of children, mostly from less affluent families, fail to reach basic standards of attainment than in these countries: this is not only unjust, but it creates huge economic costs. And there are significant geographical disparities; while London has the country’s best state schools, children in the north and Midlands are much more likely to attend poor schools.

The argument advanced in favour of expanding grammars is that they tackle social inequalities by stretching bright children from poor backgrounds. This is an important objective, but there is no evidence selection does anything to achieve it. Where they exist, grammars are dominated by children from affluent families whose parents can afford the private tuition to coach them for the high-stakes 11-plus. Even if new grammars had a proportion of places reserved for children from low-income families, it’s easy to imagine how affluent parents desperate to get their children in would deploy creative means to get around an income test: taking year-long unpaid sabbaticals or artificially reducing earnings from self-employment, for example. Yet introducing selection comes at great expense to the children who fail the 11-plus, by creaming off able children from affluent backgrounds from all-ability schools. In Kent, one of the few areas that has selective schools, children from low-income backgrounds do worse than elsewhere in the country.

May is wrong to argue grammars can be part of a diverse school system that offers parents choice. A school system is either selective or it is not. By having a negative impact on the majority of children in areas where there is selection, selection takes away their parents’ choice. Expanding grammar schools will make the biggest failing of the English school system – the large numbers of young people who leave school without good basic qualifications – even worse.

It is entirely rational for parents to do everything in their power to get their child into a grammar school where they exist. But unlike parents, the government has a responsibility to all children. To pursue education reform in the hope of helping a small number of children at a guaranteed cost to others is not just misguided: it is immoral.

The model that government should be looking to is not Kent, but London. London’s comprehensive school system outperforms Kent’s for children from every social background. The top-ranking school systems internationally similarly shun selection.

Government should instead be doing much more to address the lack of good schools across some parts of the country, to ensure all children have access to a robust, stretching education. Great schools have great teachers and great heads. The government should be investing far more in attracting the best teachers to the poorest-performing areas, for example, by offering support with housing costs or waiving tuition fee debt. Children from less affluent backgrounds are far less likely to attend a good school; government should be addressing backdoor social selection via inflated house prices by expanding catchment areas and allocating places at oversubscribed schools by a lottery.

Yet May is focusing energy in all the wrong places. She has indicated she will lift restrictions on selection by belief for new faith schools, despite the fact they are already less ethnically and socially mixed than other schools in their area and this will make them more so. Requiring universities and private schools to sponsor academies will at best bring very marginal benefits; some of these existing partnerships have been successful, while others have produced very disappointing results.

Michael Gove christened his critics in the progressive education establishment “the Blob”. The voices that have come out in criticism of May’s proposals are far more broad-based: Michael Wilshaw, the chief inspector of schools who ran one of the country’s first academies; Nicky Morgan, education secretary until just two months ago.

Not even the current education secretary, Justine Greening, the first occupant of that office to have been educated at a comprehensive, mounted a convincing defence.

While expanding selection has terrible implications for the education system, the politics may have been what proved tempting for May. Her greatest challenge will be negotiating the terms of Britain’s exit from the EU. Her strongest opposition in parliament will come not from a Labour party that has never looked weaker, but from critics to her right. Electorally, May will be more worried about leaking support to Ukip than to Labour and expanding grammars is popular among Leave and Ukip voters. In the wake of the EU referendum, Labour’s failure to provide any credible electoral threat will help ensure the politics of the next parliament will be dominated by this dynamic, rather than a traditional left-right one.

But just as Brexit is unlikely to directly benefit those whom globalisation and structural economic change have left behind, expanding grammars, even with the stipulation they reserve places for children from low-income backgrounds, is likely to have the most negative impact on white, working-class boys. Places reserved for low-income children will most likely go to those from the ethnic minority groups that outperform white working-class children at age 11.

So far, May’s rhetoric has been carefully pitched around standing up for ordinary, working-class people against the interests of the wealthiest and the most powerful. Yet so far the substance of her domestic policy – watering down plans to combat childhood obesity and expanding selective education – will achieve the opposite, even if that is not her intention.

It suggests it is she, not her opponents, who stands guilty of allowing dogma and ideology to get in the way of addressing social inequity.