
I’m in Venice for the film festival, and the city is sunk in a lagoon of pensiveness. The opening gala dinner was cancelled out of respect for the 290 people who lost their lives in the earthquake that hit central Italy. Venice itself has a history of earthquakes: one in 1223 damaged the monastery of San Giorgio Maggiore and permanently submerged the islands of Ammiana and Constanziaca.
The city’s relationship with tourism worsens. Deterred by terrorism elsewhere in the world, more visitors than ever are arriving. Mind-bogglingly gigantic cruise liners loom up by the Piazza San Marco like something from a sci-fi movie. Pretty much everyone deplores these monsters except the city’s new mayor, Luigi Brugnaro, who cheerfully welcomes the tourist bucks they’re bringing in.
And, in a final blow to Venetian mystique, there is a plan to build a tunnel under the lagoon: a soulless project that would, for example, have taken all the poignancy out of Gustav von Aschenbach’s arrival in Death in Venice.




Venice film festival: Hollywood looks to Italy for Oscars launchpad




The tourist explosion is also causing enormous pressure on hotel space: the city has only has 2,400 hotels. Not enough. The growth in hotel construction threatens to hollow out the entire city. I am staying in a modest place on the Lido. Every year in a spirit of cinephilia, I ask the festival authorities if I can please have the hotel where Donald Sutherland and Julie Christie had sex in Don’t Look Now. And every year I am told it is not possible, and that this scene was not filmed in Venice anyway.
Virtual reality check
Is the life of one of cinema history’s least interesting trends drawing to a close? Or, to put it another way, is something that had recently been (for the second time in its history) hailed as the future of the medium going the way of the Apollo moon missions and Concorde? 3D is, it seems, fading out. I remember the time when James Cameron’s blockbuster Avatar, with its blue Smurf-like creatures in three vividly tendered dimensions, was solemnly described by excitable industry observers as a “step change” in the medium.
It’s difficult to recapture that mood of awestruck submission now. The new action movie Jason Bourne, starring Matt Damon as the slab-pec’d hero, has been released in 2D in western markets – its special, snazzy, 3D version can be seen only in Chinese cinemas. But seasick Chinese audiences are reeling out of cinemas to be violently ill, and Beijing filmgoers have organised a protest. The 3D Bourne has done well in China, though I suspect it would have done even better in 2D.
If there is resistance even in commercially vital East Asia, 3D will have to go into hibernation again – before being re-rediscovered in 30 years’ time – as the industry throws its energy instead into VR: virtual reality. People watching immersive movies on wraparound headsets. Because we already have a very well-established 3D entertainment content platform: theatre.
Mrs Osborne’s boys
 
The BBC is under fire for nostalgic necrophilia: reheating old sitcoms. The department store comedy Are You Being Served? has been briefly revived with a new cast in an eerily exact replica – having evidently been forgiven for its representation of women and gay men. However, It Ain’t Half Hot Mum – the Raj comedy that featured a white actor blacked up to play a bearer – remains airbrushed out of BBC comedy history.
Why are we dredging up these old forms when there is a rich seam of new sitcom material right under our noses: I mean George Osborne and his family going back to live with his wealthy parents in west London. It could be shot in front of a Mrs Brown’s Boys-type live studio audience. Reece Shearsmith would play George, back from holiday, loafing disconsolately around the house with his souvenir machine gun in his Viet Cong getup. His tetchy dad, played by Nigel Havers, is on at him to get a job with Goldman Sachs. Unemployed David Cameron – played by Andrew Scott – would come round, idly wondering if George fancies a pint. It would be called Whatever Happened to the Likely Lads?

