




 

Cowardice asks the question: is it safe? Expediency asks the question: is it politic? Vanity asks the question: is it popular? But conscience asks the question: is it right? And there comes a time when one must take a position that is neither safe, nor politic, nor popular; but one must take it because it is right – Martin Luther King


When then prime minister Tony Abbott announced the marriage equality plebiscite in 2015, I knew it was a bad idea. It was transparently a desperate, expedient move to head off a parliamentary vote, reduce the temperature of the issue, get it off the agenda ahead of the 2016 federal election and try to destroy it by using the age old tactic of delay.




Marriage equality: Labor, Greens and independents will bring forward bills




The proposed plebiscite was the signal that the proponents of marriage equality were winning. In hindsight, the campaign effort should have been revved up but instead, acceptance of the plebiscite was an own goal. It should have been obvious to all sides of politics that Abbott had been driven to retreat and had to employ the political tactic – if you can’t win, then delay.
That is why the people most enthusiastic about the plebiscite are those who oppose marriage equality. They know that if a free parliamentary vote was taken, they would lose. Discrimination could end this week. That is why they are so fiercely opposed to a parliamentary vote and made the plebiscite a condition of handing Malcolm Turnbull the prime ministership. Unlike LGBTI people, they have nothing to lose and everything to gain.
The plebiscite is not about democracy, human rights or constitutional change. It is a concocted last stand against LGBTI rights. If not, why this issue and not any other? It is a classic case of having lost in the parliament, then taking it to the people and having one last shot at defeating it courtesy of a public vote which gives anti-marriage equality groups the chance to run a campaign of lies and fear. It worked with Brexit, why not here? It is a dangerous precedent in a representative democracy.




 

Holding the plebiscite will be the mechanism for the hard right to destroy Turnbull and delay marriage equality.




 

Earlier this year, all my alarm bells went off when Chris Miles, former Liberal MP for Braddon, reappeared 26 years after his appalling appearance at the infamous anti-gay law reform meeting in Ulverstone Tasmania in 1989. He announced he had authorised a shocking anti-gay marriage brochure and threatened to distribute a million copies.
Under the Howard government, he founded the rightwing Lyons Forum and so –surprise, surprise – when Eric Abetz and Kevin Andrews, who were co-founders of that forum, were dropped from the Turnbull ministry, he coincidentally reappeared. Twenty years later, they couldn’t put out such a brochure but he could.
This puts the lie to those Liberals who think dropping the plebiscite would undermine Turnbull. This is wrong. Holding the plebiscite will be the mechanism for the hard right to destroy Turnbull and delay marriage equality, two birds with the one stone. This is the flexing of the muscles of the emergent Tea Party. The Liberals know they can’t do a Rudd, Gillard, Rudd but they can do an Abbott, Turnbull – fall on his sword – Abbott. Like Turnbull, David Cameron thought he couldn’t lose but ended up as the fall guy. The referendum in the UK was the weapon of choice.
There are so many reasons why the plebiscite is wrong. First on a matter of principle, you don’t hold an opinion poll on human rights. They are inalienable. John Howard discriminated against LGBTI people by making them unequal before the law. Now is the time to reverse his discrimination, not conduct an opinion poll with the “no” case publicly funded and designed to legitimise discrimination and human rights abuse.
As to those in the LNP who argue that the plebiscite is the fastest way of securing marriage equality given the prime minister has refused a free parliamentary vote: no, what they mean to say is, it is the fastest way given their loyalty to the PM and their prospects for promotion and preselection in the Liberal party. These things outweigh their conviction on the issue such that they won’t cross the floor.
Those outside the LNP who think the same know that the plebiscite is wrong but are genuinely concerned about another three years of delay: to them I would say, firstly, the end does not justify the means, it is a dangerous precedent. I would also ask whether they had considered the “no” vote might win given our history of referenda and the ugly nature of the campaign.
Secondly, I would say, consider the realpolitik. Does anyone seriously think it is in the interests of the LNP to keep marriage equality on the agenda, to keep stonewalling in the parliament right up until the next election, to keep putting marriage equality front and centre in an election in which the LNP will be fighting for its life? The rightwingers do, but it’s hard to see the powerbrokers and remaining marginal seat holders sharing that opinion.




 

The plebiscite is wrong because it deliberately and knowingly hurts people.




 

If I am wrong and bloody mindedness prevails in a Custer’s last stand reenactment, then it’s good news for Australia, there will be a change of government and marriage equality will be secured. While it will be years later than it should have been, it will at least not be at the expense of the lives of many LGBTI people.
If the plebiscite enabling legislation is defeated, I think the LNP will have to rethink its strategy. I would argue it is more likely, not less likely, that a free parliamentary vote would take place. As his approval rating falls, to save himself, Turnbull has to stand up to his enemies from within. The defeat of the enabling legislation creates that space.
But putting aside the principle of it, the tactics surrounding it, even the ridiculous cost of it, the plebiscite is wrong because it deliberately and knowingly hurts people. I lived through the poisonous debate in Tasmania in the 1990s. I watched as LGBTI people were arrested in Salamanca Market because their very presence was said to offend the family values of the market. I walked into a public meeting in Devonport with Michael Kirby and people spat on his coat.
I watched as young LGBTI people left the state because of the rejection they felt and I have heard the stories of suicide in the face of that rejection. I watched the bravery, pain and suffering of those who stayed and through the Tasmanian Gay and Lesbian Group took their case all the way to the United Nations. When I first put my legislation to the Tasmanian Parliament for gay law reform in 1996, Michael Hodgman former Liberal MP for Denison called me the “mother of teenage sodomy” on ABC radio.
On the streets, it was worse. I couldn’t count the number of times Bob Brown was abused from passing cars or jeering passersby. In the Senate, innuendo and offensive remarks were made about LGBTI people from elements within both sides of politics but I am proud to say the Australian Greens have never wavered, every vote, every time to end discrimination and for marriage equality.
As the mother of a gay son, my sense of justice is deeply offended that some people think it is OK for the whole of Australia to have a say in whether he can marry the person he loves, whereas for their own heterosexual sons and daughters, they consider it is no one else’s business.
I ask you, how would you feel if someone told you that they thought your son or daughter should be denied the same rights as their children on the sole basis of their sexuality or their race or their gender?
Anyone who thinks that because gay rights are inevitable, that things have moved on and there will be an outpouring of sweetness and light, think again. Last stands engender extreme tactics. Expect the Liberal party to once again link up with the extreme cult, the Exclusive Brethren, after all, John Howard associated with them, the Liberal party takes their donations and Malcolm Turnbull thinks that is OK.
Expect most of the churches, including the Catholic Church, to join forces with the Australian Christian Lobby (ACL) and preach the “no” case from the pulpit and distribute materials in churches throughout the country, with the Uniting Church being the authentically Christian exception.
Already the Tasmanian government has moved to amend the anti-discrimination act to exempt “religious purposes” to enable “free speech” during the plebiscite. Doesn’t that tell you what to expect?




Malcolm Turnbull, please don't break the nation's heart over marriage equality | Kristina Keneally




Citing Ireland as an example is an inappropriate comparison. Unlike here, where there will be vocal and organised elements within the Liberal, Labor and National parties opposed to marriage equality, all Ireland’s main political parties supported marriage equality. The organised opposition came from the Catholic Church which had been so discredited by the sex abuse scandals that had rocked the country, that its campaign was ineffectual. It is a different political and cultural context. 
We have a real opportunity right now to stand with LGBTI people for human rights and human dignity, for a happier, healthier country by affirming the equality of people of all races, religions, genders, ages, abilities and sexualities. We can stand together against discrimination of any kind, against expedience, cowardice and vanity. We can do the right thing and defeat the enabling legislation for the proposed plebiscite and insist parliament gets on with it.
As one of many parents of LGBTI Australians, I am asking you, prime minister, to unify the country around a celebration of love and diversity with a free parliamentary vote. Don’t divide us by forcing our families and our children to survive a hate-filled maelstrom just so you can remain prime minister.
Dumping the plebiscite might not be safe, politic or popular for you in the Liberal party, but it is right for the country. The time has come for you to lead, to take a position which is right.

