As the 2016 Olympics gets under way, the American commentators are leading the medal tables in all the everyday-sexism events. NBC took an early lead by crediting the Hungarian swimmer Katinka Hosszu’s husband for her gold medal win (“This is the man responsible for turning his wife into an entirely new swimmer”). The Chicago Tribune cemented it, with a tweet about the trap shooter Corey Cogdell-Unrein’s medal: “Wife of a Bears’ lineman wins a bronze.”

But the star player was John Miller, of NBC, who explained why the channel didn’t show the opening ceremony live. “More women watch the games than men,” he rationalised, “and they’re less interested in the result and more interested in the journey. It’s sort of like the ultimate reality show and mini-series wrapped into one.”

Perhaps, having lost millions of viewers to other channels as a result of its decision, NBC will figure it out: women might just watch the Olympic Games more than other televised sports because the Olympic Games have more women in them.

Inevitably, there has been a backlash by the #NotAllMen brigade against hypocritical feminists who complain about the objectification of women while blatantly ogling the men’s aquatic sports. Obviously these are men who campaign for equality, so we don’t have to explain how this works within the context of thousands of years of mostly male violence against women’s bodies. But perhaps it might be more polite to keep our thoughts about swimwear to ourselves. And if women can promise never again to say anything objectifying, sexist or demeaning about the American divers’ bottoms, I’m sure that all the campaigning men can agree to uphold the same standards towards women forever, right?

To me, the beauty of Olympic sports is that they show the pinnacle of what the human body can achieve with a lifetime of dedication and training. That, and they are all so different: a swimmer’s body has literally grown into a different shape from that of a weightlifter or a long-distance runner through training. Paralympians can do things with their bodies that Bradley Wiggins or Kelly Holmes never could. Of course, some viewers will enjoy watching individual track events more than team games. Some will admire the grace and skill of women’s rugby better than the grunt and punt of the men’s sport. Some will prefer the speed and glory of Usain Bolt to the sheer, all-round awesomeness of Jessica Ennis-Hill. In the Olympics, there is something for everyone.

Unfortunately, many of the people responsible for the year-round coverage of sport don’t agree, and seem to think that men’s football is the only real sport, and that sports become less interesting the less they resemble the teams. Therefore, women’s sports, athletics and the Paralympics are intrinsically less good, and less deserving of attention, coverage or funding. Personally, I’ve seen more genuine action at a children’s ballet recital than in the average football game, and I’ve never once looked at Wayne Rooney and thought, ‘I’d like to grow up and be just like him’, but isn’t it lovely that we all have different interests?

Inspiring the next generation of athletes is, after all, supposed to be part of the Olympic legacy. This is why the language we use around sport is important. Sadly, a Cambridge University Press report published this month shows that still, in 2016, “language around women in sport focuses disproportionately on the appearance, clothes and personal lives of women”.

Rio 2016 Olympics - in pictures







74 show all Rio 2016 Olympics - in pictures

















































































































































1/74 Day Eight Andy Murray celebrates his victory over Kai Nishikori to reach the men's Olympic final. Getty

2/74 Day Eight Jessica Ennis-Hill continues her bid for gold in heptathlon. Getty

3/74 Day Eight Usain Bolt breezed through his 100m heat. Getty

4/74 Day Eight Team GB took silver in the women's eight. Getty

5/74 Day Eight The men's eight gold took Great Britain top of the rowing medal table. Getty

6/74 Day Seven Britain's Jazz Carlin secured her second silver of the Games in the women's 800m freestyle, as American Katie Ledecky surged to her fourth Rio gold. Getty

7/74 Day Seven Singapore's Joseph Schooling won his nation's first gold medal with victory in the 100m butterfly as Michael Phelps was denied a 23rd Olympic title. Getty

8/74 Day Seven Sir Bradley Wiggins becomes Britain's greatest Olympian ever as Team GB win gold in the men's Team Pursuit at the Velodrome. AFP

9/74 Day Seven Bryony Page on her way to a silver in gymnastics trampoline. EPA

10/74 Day Seven Heather Stanning and Helen Glover win gold in the women's rowing pairs. Getty

11/74 Day Seven Alex Gregory, Mohamed Sbihi, George Nash and Constantine Louloudis celebrate their success in the men’s coxless four. Getty

12/74 Day Seven Defending champions Great Britain won silver in the Olympic team dressage, as world champions Germany claimed gold. The British quartet - Spencer Wilton, Fiona Bigwood, Carl Hester and Charlotte Dujardin - were beaten into second by 3.334 points. Getty

13/74 Day Six American Simone Manuel became the first black female swimmer to win an Olympic title as she shared the women's 100m freestyle gold with Canada's Penny Oleksiak, 16, after a dead heat. Getty Images

14/74 Day Six Swimming legend Michael Phelps demolished the field in the 200m individual medley to claim his 22nd Olympic gold. Getty

15/74 Day Six Simone Biles takes gold in the Women’s individual all-around artistic gymnastics. Getty

16/74 Day Six Fiji's Vatemo Ravouvou breaks through to score during the Men's Rugby Sevens Gold medal final match against Great Britain. Team GB settled for silver as Fiji romped to gold. David Rogers/Getty Images

17/74 Day Six Callum Skinner, Jason Kenny and Philip Hindes of Great Britain celebrate after winning gold in the men's team sprint. AFP

18/74 Day Six Double act David Florence and Richard Hounslow won their second joint Olympic silver in the canoeing slalom. Getty

19/74 Day Six Victoria Thornley and Katherine Grainger show off their silver medals after the women's double sculls final Getty

20/74 Day Five Max Whitlock poses with his bronze medal Getty

21/74 Day Five Joe Clarke reacts to winning Britain's second gold of thee Games Reuters

22/74 Day Five Jack Laugher and Chris Mears celebrate with their gold medals Getty

23/74 Day Four David Florence suffered heartbreak in the canoe single C1 men's semi-final Getty

24/74 Day Four Andy Murray celebrates his straight sets victory against Juan Monaco Getty

25/74 Day Three Lilly King shows off her gold medal as Yulia Efimova parades her silver AFP

26/74 Day Three Russia's Yulia Efimova (left) looks on as the US's Lilly King (right) celebrates winning the Women's 100m Breaststroke Final earlier this morning Getty

27/74 Day Three Lilly King celebrates after beating her Russian rival Yulia Efimova Getty

28/74 Day Three Michael Phelps takes on Chad Le Clos in the men's 200m butterfly final Getty

29/74 Day Three Michael Phelps says it 'breaks my heart' to see drug cheats at the Olympics Getty

30/74 Day Three James Guy missed out on bronze on Monday night Getty

31/74 Day Three Louis Smith reacts to his pommel stumble which may have cost Team GB a medal Getty

32/74 Day Three Dan Goodfellow (right) and Tom Daley celebrate with their bronze medals Getty

33/74 Day Three Tom Daley and Dan Goodfellow dive into the pool in delight after winning bronze Getty

34/74 Day Three Tom Daley (left) and Daniel Goodfellow performing in the men's synchronised 10m platform final PA

35/74 Day Three Canada celebrate their victory against Team GB on day three Getty

36/74 Day Three Heather Watson leaves the court yesterday after losing her second round match against Elina Svitolina of Ukraine Reuters

37/74 Day Two Carlin proudly shows off her silver medal Getty

38/74 Day Two Carlin reacts after learning that she has won the silver medal Getty

39/74 Day Two Peaty shows off his gold medal with pride Getty

40/74 Day Two Adam Peaty celebrates his gold Getty

41/74 Day Two Andy Murray and Jamie Murray were knocked out of the men's doubles by Thomaz Bellucci and Andre Sa AFP

42/74 Day Two Venus and Serena Williams suffered their first ever Olympic defeat playing together Getty

43/74 Day Two Richard Kruse battling the Russian Timur Safin GETTY

44/74 Day Two Lizzie Armitstead finished fifth in the women's road race PA

45/74 Day Two Anna van der Breggen celebrates winning gold in the women's road race Reuters

46/74 Day Two Annemiek van Vleuten suffered a horrific accident in the women's road race Reuters

47/74 Day Two The women's road race passes along the beach in Rio de Janeiro Getty

48/74 Day Two Andy Murray beat Viktor Troicki 6-3, 6-2 to win his men's singles first round match Getty

49/74 Day Two Serena Williams is through to the second round of the women's singles after defeating Daria Gavrilova Getty

50/74 Day Two Gold medal winner, Hoang Xuan Vinh of Vietnam, center, silver medal winner, Felipe Almeida Wu of Brazil, left, and bronze medalist Pang Wei of China, at the victory ceremony for the men's 10-meter air pistol event AP

51/74 Day Two Rowing was cancelled on day two over fears of sinking and capsizing due to strong winds Getty

52/74 Day One Yusra Mardini has won her heat of the Women's 100m Butterfly but she will not be able to go forward to the semi-final Getty Images

53/74 Day One Britain's James Guy chops through the water Getty

54/74 Day One Kantinka Hosszu of Hungary set a new world record in winning gold in the Women's 100m Individual Medley final Getty

55/74 Day One Samir Ait Said receiving medical help after suffering a badly broken leg Getty

56/74 Day One Yusra Mardini leads the race in the 100m Butterfly heat at Olympic Aquatics Stadium in Rio EPA

57/74 Day One Natasha Hunt scored two tries to inspire Britain to victory against Brazil Getty

58/74 Day One Joanne Watmore scored Britain's first try in Olympic rugby sevens history Getty

59/74 Day One Adam Peaty celebrates after breaking the 100m breaststroke world record Getty

60/74 Day One Adam Peaty broke his own world record in the 100m breaststroke heats and is favourite to win gold on Sunday Getty

61/74 Day One Adam Peaty broke his own world record in the 100m breaststroke heats Getty

62/74 Day One Chris Froome speaks with a bruised Geraint Thomas after the men's road race PA

63/74 Day One Greg van Avermaet celebrates winning gold in the men's road race Getty

64/74 Day One Rafal Majka was caught with just two kilometres to go Getty

65/74 Day One Greg van Avermaet won a sprint finish to clinch Olympic road race gold EPA

66/74 Day One A bullet is marked by Brazilian police in the equestrian media centre Getty

67/74 Day One The peloton make their way along the beach during the road race Getty

68/74 Day One Chris Froome leads away the men's road race along with the rest of Team GB Getty

69/74 Day One The field make their way along the opening stages of the road race Eric Gaillard/Reuters

70/74 Day One Mahe Drysdale of New Zealand had no trouble in qualifying for the men's single skulls quarter-finals Getty

71/74 Day One Rowers warm up under the watchful gaze of the Christ the Redeemer statue Getty

72/74 Opening Ceremony A huge fireworks display signals the end of the Rio 2016 Opening Ceremony. Felipe Dana/AP

73/74 Opening Ceremony Andy Murray leads out Team GB at the Rio Olympics opening ceremony Getty

74/74 Opening Ceremony Gisele Bundchen turns the stage into a catwalk during the opening ceremony AP

Here in the UK, we haven't behaved much better than the Americans – especially since sports commentator Helen Skelton fell foul of sexist commentary without even being a competitor. But fortunately, the BBC is beginning to look like an Olympic winner with its coverage of the Games (despite BBC Africa somewhat distastefully referring to the Egyptian volleyball team’s match against Germany as a case of “Bikini v Burka”). For the most part, men and women commentate enthusiastically and knowledgeably on all sports. Women’s achievements are celebrated just the same as men’s.

But one personal comment was, I thought, particularly positive. Talking about Tom Daley’s support network in his third Olympics, Clare Balding mentioned in passing that many of his family and his “husband-to-be” were with him. Now that’s the kind of legacy I can get behind. (Though if I do get behind Tom Daley, I promise to keep my opinions to myself.)