
I want to start by saying sorry to our customers. In recent months travelling on Southern trains has been a nightmare. They have been disrupted by repeated RMT action and suffered cancellations on a daily basis. This has left us unable to run the service people expect. This week, things are even worse, with passengers enduring a full five-day strike, the longest on the railways for decades.
While the current service level is unacceptable, the RMT’s action is unnecessary and unjustified. The root cause of this problem lies in its intransigent and self-interested attitude towards small but important reforms we’re making to working practices that will improve the punctuality of our services and enhance customer service on trains.




Southern rail strike: day two of commuter misery amid war of words




Passenger numbers on Britain’s railways are soaring. They’ve gone up 70% in little over a decade. To accommodate this, we cannot stay the same. We must invest, and we must change how we work. At the same time, in all walks of life, people’s expectations of customer service are much higher than a generation ago. Industries such as retail have changed radically in response to rising customer expectations. But on the railways we are often slow to change. But we must, and it should start now.
We’re investing hugely in new trains with greater capacity and changing the old role of the conductor so that they no longer close the doors – a task that passes to the driver. In fact, the driver already does this on 40% of our trains and has done so for up to 25 years. So what we are doing is nothing radical or new. All we are doing is extending this proven way of working.
No one is losing their job. No one is getting a pay cut. And let’s be absolutely clear – just as many trains will have a second member of staff on board as do today. Freed from operating the doors, they will be moving through the trains offering the highly visible and direct customer service passengers want. We’ll also equip them with new technology so they can offer passengers up-to-date information about services, tickets and onward travel.








  

Photograph: Guy Bell//REX/Shutterstock


RMT claims that this way of running trains is unsafe, yet offer not one shred of evidence to this effect. RMT members have been safely operating trains this way for decades, and we have these driver-operated doors already on 2,000 services daily. Recently the rail industries’ independent rail safety board has confirmed that drivers fully controlling the doors might even be safer than having conductors also involved in the task.
That such a change is causing the RMT to unleash such misery on passengers is mystifying. Some have suggested the real reason for its disproportionate reaction is that it fears a loss of its own power and control, and want to maintain its ability to stop services.
Last week, we spent three days at Acas trying to find a deal to avoid this strike and tabled a comprehensive eight-point compromise plan. The deal guaranteed jobs and guaranteed that we would continue to roster staff on to every train that we do at present. But the RMT dismissed the plan, condemning hundreds of thousands of our customers to another week of travel hardship.
So far this week the strike timetable is running as well as can be expected. The strike means we have 40% fewer trains running every day, of those trains we are able to provide 90% are on time.
Significantly, we are also seeing conductors themselves begin to “vote with their feet” and return to work in defiance of the RMT. On the first day of the strike around one in five conductors came to work anyway. I thank those men and women who have demonstrated their commitment to serving our passengers, and commend their courage in standing up for what they believe in.




 

The hard-working railway men and women of Britain are being led astray by a trade union acting in its own interests




 

The railway men and women of Britain are overwhelmingly diligent and hard-working, and they care deeply about the rail service they provide. But they are being led astray, and misled repeatedly, by a trade union acting in its own narrow, selfish interests and ignoring the interests of either commuters or its members. The deal we offered protects RMT members’ jobs, by giving them a vital task the railway will always need, rather than one being rendered redundant by new technology.
This week’s strike must be the last. Southern needs to restore to passengers the service they rightly demand. So the RMT faces a clear choice: it can either be part of the problem, or it can be part of the solution. We have said we will have talks with the union “any time, any place, anywhere” and I hope we can sit around the table again soon and sort this out once and for all. I know what every Southern passenger would want them to do. This has to stop, and stop now.

