




Tell us how you got here: share your stories of immigration




I was born in Algeria in the mid-1980s in a middle-class, secular family deeply attached to democratic values. I grew up speaking French, Arabic and sometimes Berber. My childhood was filled with summers by the beach, simple pleasures like eating fresh watermelon on the sand, Friday visits to the market with my father and the weekly traditional couscous with a glass of leben, a dairy beverage. But the innocence of my childhood was soon disrupted by a civil war. 
Algeria experienced an “Arab Fall” in 1988, which led to a war between armed Islamic groups and the Algerian army and state. Many journalists, intellectuals, artists were among about 200,000 Algerians who died under the blades and bullets of these fanatic murderers. Almost overnight, the face of Algerian society changed and entered one of the darkest times of its history.
During the paroxysm of the war in the mid-90s, my parents decided that it was safer to temporarily move to France, as my mother had received death threats. It was a return “home” for her as she was born and raised in France by immigrant Algerian parents. 
I remember feeling grateful that I could finally walk down the street without being scared. But yet, I often felt out of place. I encountered racism for the first time and discovered what it was to be an outsider. I was surprised to discover that Algerians were not exactly well received and welcome. I did not know then, considering my age, the complicated intricacies inherited from colonial times. 




My American dream led to a trailer park. And I couldn't be happier | Simon McMuller




Though I mastered the French language and most of the cultural codes, people often reminded me that I was not exactly “French”. I remember people always asking if I felt more Algerian or French or which country I preferred and I never knew which box I was supposed to check. 
 I then started college and turned into the “typical” leftwing, feminist in the making, studying philosophy and sociology at the Sorbonne. I was very critical of American foreign policy – especially the war in Iraq. My political views have not drastically changed since then, but they have become more nuanced and pragmatic. 
 In the summer of 2007, I moved to Ohio to participate in an exchange program. It all happened by accident as I missed the deadline for the exchange programs in England and the only anglophone country left was the US. It was never my dream to visit America, much less live here.
I soon discovered the privilege of teaching and learning in a liberal arts college with a diverse community. I became aware of the multiple subcultures of this gigantic country that is the United States and I remember being amazed by how people considered America their home while also remaining proud of their ethnic or cultural background. 
That didn’t negate the persisting racism and the presence of the dark cloud of slavery floating over America. Yet, those years ended up being among the most enriching of my life. I slowly fell in love with this heterogeneous society. I could finally say that I was Algerian without being apprehensive of how people would respond. America also allowed me to appreciate and embrace my “Frenchness” – up until then, I did not really know how French I was. I was finally able to articulate the complexities and many layers of my identity. 




Racism drove me from Malaysia. Love brought me to America | Treena Becker




Now, I am at the University of Miami, doing a PhD. My research explores post-colonial literature and discourse from North Africa dealing with questions of gender, sexuality and Islam. My time here has helped me forge a better understanding of all these haunting questions and anxieties I had.
After many years, I decided to define home as the place where I felt happy and the most comfortable in my skin. That place is Miami. This is not where I was born, nor where I have spent the most time. Most here don’t speak my mother tongue, nor practice the same religion that I do. But, in many ways, I feel as American as I feel Algerian or French. I want to participate in making America greater as a woman, a Muslim, a humanist, a feminist and a dreamer – with every part of my identity, which this country has allowed me to embrace.

