
We are now on the sixth day of strike action by couriers from the delivery firm Deliveroo. Triggered by new payment terms imposed by management, drivers are calling for a national boycott of the company until the new pay scheme is opt-in rather than opt-out, the threat of dismissal is lifted from its workforce and the company implements the London living wage. So far this remarkable, non-traditional industrial action has seen non-unionised drivers organise themselves in physical meetings and on WhatsApp, a crowdfunded strike fund of over £10,000 raised online and consumers and restaurants call for an end to driver exploitation on Twitter.




Deliveroo rider: 'After an accident or injury we are on our own'




However, to fully understand the Deliveroo strike dispute, it is important to realise that the two foundations of our present gig economy, freedom and flexibility, in practice mean exhaustion and exploitation. This is not only a dispute over pay, but a conflict over the nature of language and our vision of the economy itself; do we want an economy where “freedom” means exploitation or where it means security and liberty?
The Independent Workers’ Union of Great Britain (IWGB) is raising this question as a trade union facilitating and supporting a campaign that is fundamentally worker-led. Without being members of any union Deliveroo drivers have organised effective action to bring the world’s attention to their inspirational struggle. We have realised this is the moment when the social network strikes back against the gig economy. This is why we are backing the drivers’ autonomous action to the hilt, liaising with management and providing crowdfunded cover for the many strikers who have signed up to the IWGB over the past few days.




 

Deliveroo's deal offers drivers neither security nor liberty; it will make life harder for them and their families.




 

For Deliveroo chief executive and co-founder William Shu, “freedom” clearly means exploitation. Responding to the strike on BBC Radio 4 on Monday, he claimed to offer couriers a wage guarantee of £7.50 “during peak hours” for “a limited time” and a “choice” to opt out of his new piece rate pay scheme. While this was trumpeted as a concession to our demands, it has been widely misrepresented. Shu’s deal offers drivers neither security nor liberty; it will make life harder for them and their families.
Many reporters have failed to note that Deliveroo lets workers opt out of a scheme that leaves them with no guaranteed income only if they work in a delivery zone where this scheme is not already in place, even if this means moving from south-west London’s Kingston to Hackney, on the other side of the city. This forces drivers to leave neighbourhoods where their local knowledge helps them make fast deliveries for unfamiliar parts of town. Deliveroo has also made clear in emails to workers, as seen by Channel 4 News, that while workers are not “obliged” to sign the new agreement, it is a “compulsory requirement” for all riders in the area who wish to continue working for the company. Some “choice”. Some “flexibility”.




Deliveroo workers strike again over new pay structure




Note that when Shu speaks of couriers making an average of £9.20 to £9.30 per hour (a figure disputed by many drivers), this does not consider that drivers are paying out hundreds of pounds for bike repairs, scooter insurance and tax accounting. Shu states Deliveroo is a partner of two road safety charities, but he does not mention that when drivers are injured on the job they do not receive a penny in sick pay. Nor does he mention that Deliveroo does not contribute to pension payments. This is the “freedom” drivers are given.
This dispute highlights the danger that arises when the buzzwords of zero-hours Britain become detached from workers’ everyday reality. What would offer couriers genuine freedom is a guaranteed London living wage of £9.40 per hour with an extra £1 per delivery and a commitment by Deliveroo to cover the costs of insurance and repairs. Many other courier firms have done this after negotiations with the IWGB, so why not Deliveroo? This is what the striking drivers are asking for. It is a modest demand, to give them the freedom to provide for themselves and their families, and the flexibility to take a day off work when they feel ill. This is the modern economy we want to see.
• This article was amended on 17 August 2016 to remove an incorrect reference to whistleblowers. Two blogs which set out Deliveroo’s perspective can be found here and here.

