
What’s been the fallout from the EU referendum so far? One unexpected consequence is a rise in interest in moving to the land of the long white cloud.  The New Zealand immigration website – a guide to living and working in the country – recorded a huge spike in queries from British nationals. So much so that the New Zealand Herald playfully declared it a “British invasion”. 
But what should Brits expect if they relocate? And why is the country so appealing? We asked those already there to tell us.
Ann, 52, from Auckland: ‘I love the idea of Brits moving here – they have a great sense of humour’ 








  

What do I think of British people moving over? It’s a great idea – they have a great sense of humour. The only advice I have is come with loads of money, because New Zealand is really expensive. The one word I would use to describe New Zealand is easy – everything is so straightforward here. It’s also stunningly beautiful, with great schools, great healthcare, good weather and great food. The negatives are our prime minister and his conservative government. Housing is also ridiculously expensive in Auckland. We have dreadful traffic and an expensive (and pretty hopeless) public transport system. 




More spacious without the Brexit: why Britons are flocking to New Zealand




Robin, 40, from Wellington: ‘Flights and beer are expensive’
I welcome Brits – the more the merrier, I say. New Zealand is a wonderful place, but it does need more people here (from the UK or anywhere else). Be prepared for things to cost a fair bit more than the UK, especially travel and beer.
The “short hop” to Australia is nearly a four-hour flight, too, and there isn’t the choice of going via Easyjet or Ryanair to keep the cost down. Beer in the city (I live in Wellington) is NZ$10 a glass (£5.50), which is often annoyingly called a pint yet is more likely to be 350-425ml. Similarly, at the local nationwide chain supermarket nearby I recently paid NZ$28/kg (£16/kg) for green beans and NZ$6.50 (£3.60) for a cucumber.
The weather, house prices, salaries and traffic vary massively up and down New Zealand, so your experience will depend on where you choose to live. 








  

The picture I’ve shared above is one of Mount Ruapehu, which you’ll see when flying between Wellington and Auckland. It makes me smile and certainly beats driving up and down the M1. 
Graeme Horne, 36, from Auckland: ‘People here get up early and leave work early’
It’s great for Brits to come over here, as it will be pretty easy for them to feel immediately at home. For the locals, the society is not perfect. Poverty and hungry kids are a problem. The rate of immigration is causing some trouble – such as crazy house prices and pressure on jobs and services – and it’s not inconceivable that immigrants will be blamed, as they have been in the UK. 
Make sure you understand what the job market is like before you move. Even Auckland – the biggest city – is relatively small, and the jobs that are in demand here are quite different from back home. There simply aren’t a large number of well-paid office jobs, because the local market is so small and the country is very focused on the export of commodities rather than the local consumer. 
If you want to enjoy nature, sports, or simply a slower pace of life than the UK, then this is definitely the place for you. 
People here get up early, go to work around 8am, and leave work early compared to the UK. This makes it a really good place to have a more family-focused life as they tend to be heading home from work at 4-5pm. 
The worst thing by far is of course the isolation from friends and family. New Zealand really is as far away as you can possibly get! I’ve heard of people starting a family and having to move back home because they needed to be closer to their support network. 
Bob George, from Maungautoroto: ‘Consider New Zealand if you want to add adventure to your life’








  

I am British. I moved to New Zealand in 2008; I rather wish I had moved here earlier. People are welcoming, both at the national level and on a personal level – you go into a shop and people chat. 
If you are thinking of moving to New Zealand, do it for positive reasons – forget what bugs you about Britain. Consider New Zealand if you want to add adventure to your life, if you get thrilled by stunning vistas, like an outdoor life, enjoy people and activities and want to develop as a person. 
New Zealand, like Britain, has a very mixed culture: I run a tennis group and get people from 20 different countries coming along (Auckland has a bigger mix of nationalities than most UK cities). Maori represent about 10% of the population and have impressive spiritual and social values. 
The worst parts of living here include the poor infrastructure. Earthquakes and volcanoes might be a challenge too. It’s also very cut off – there are advantages in being 2,000km from the next nearest countries, but also a sense of isolation from the world.
Andy, from Auckland: ‘House prices have spiralled out of control’
I moved to New Zealand from the UK almost 20 years ago. In that time I’ve seen house prices spiral out of reach for almost anyone but cash-rich investors. If you are serious about putting down roots here you will need to come to terms with house prices in the urban centres of around NZ$1m (£555,600). If you have children, a house in a desirable catchment area will set you back a fair bit more.
There are undoubtedly benefits to relocating, however. For example, the weather is generally much more reliable in summer. Auckland in particular is an ethnically diverse and exciting city with many beautiful parks and beaches, which are never packed in the way an English beach such as Bournemouth is.
There is crime here, and terrible congestion at times. The health service is also under the same strain as the NHS, although it is still largely free at point of use. As a tip for anyone thinking to make the move, remember that if someone says “bring a plate” on an invitation, be sure to put some food on it too. I got caught out by that one a couple of times early on. 
Steve, 68, from Puhoi: ‘Respect the local environment’
I’m not keen on New Zealand becoming overpopulated. I know that may sound very nimbyish but the fragile environment can only take so much. I worry about people coming here with little regard for how they might damage the surrounding area, so if you do come please find out about our original ecosystems and how some are in danger of total extinction. Learn to love what is unique to the country. 
Hayley Ray, 27, from Auckland: ‘I was shocked at the culture difference’








  

As a Brit working and living in New Zealand, I think it’s amazing news that more British people are deciding to move here. New Zealand is still growing and developing. It’s a fantastic opportunity for people who want to contribute to the growth of this wonderful country. You won’t regret making the move. 
Raglan, a small seaside town 50km west of Hamilton, is so stunning when summer kicks in. However, I have fallen in love with Auckland. There is so much to do and see. Every suburb has its own unique personality, which makes Auckland a fantastic city to live in. 
When I first moved to New Zealand I was shocked at the culture difference. However, when you look for it the country has much to offer. Sure, you may not have the same music scene and high-street fashion shops, or the same access to watching the Olympics without having to pay for Sky. But you have amazing companies that manufacture goods by hand. In Britain this is becoming very rare. 
Mick, 32, from Wellington: ‘Leave bigotry behind’








  

Our country is populated by immigrants, so naturally they are most welcome here. My father’s family immigrated here in the 1970s from Scotland, and they never looked back. When he’s travelled overseas since he’s told anyone who will listen to follow suit. Immigrants fit right in here, and there are many different ethnic community centres, newspapers and other assorted organisations.
New Zealanders are prepared for all seasons. The further south you go, the colder it gets. In Auckland you can expect humidity and the occasional tornado; in Dunedin there are very cold winters, including snow. Everywhere has beautiful summers, though, and as the local saying goes: “You can’t beat Wellington on a good day.”
Leave bigotry behind. Displays of racism, sexism, misogyny or any other forms of abuse are met swiftly with social justice, and even prosecution. We are a progressive nation: we have had openly gay and transsexual MPs, prostitution is legal here, and we legalised gay marriage long ago. 
We are a nation that proudly welcomes refugees, and often protests occur to increase the number we annually allow. Many different religions and ethnicities are represented by peaceful communities, and any harassment of them is quickly met with prosecution by an unforgiving justice system. 
Kim, 56, from Wellington: ‘Be prepared to slow down and say hi in the street’








  

Aotearoa, the north part of New Zealand, is full of migrants. A few more won’t hurt. It’s not where you come from; it’s how you live that counts. This isn’t Britain, which has a lot of advantages – concentrate on these. 
People should come with an open mind to bi- and multi-cultural living. They should be prepared to slow down, smile, watch Division 4 football in the Australian A-League, say hi to people on the street, and learn enough te reo Maori to be comfortable in Maori settings. 

