Everyone knows in theory that earthquakes wreak appalling human and neighbourhood damage, wherever they occur. Yet those of us fortunate enough to live in a part of the world not generally threatened by them can become complacent. Humanity is indivisible, yet it can sometimes take an event close to home, even in the global media world, to lay bare the fear, loss and trauma of an unexpected catastrophe, after which nothing can be quite the same for a generation of survivors.

The Italian earthquake is such an event. Not only was it geographically near to Britain. It also took place in a place familiar to many British summer visitors to the Apennines. The suddenness of Wednesday’s earthquake, and the scale of nighttime destruction and death in Amatrice and the surrounding area will be eclipsed by much worse events in other parts of the world. But this is not a competition. The deaths of at least 267 people, the collapse of so many beautiful buildings and the long painful aftermath which now begins cut to the heart with an unusual directness.

Britain may have suffered few earthquakes, but it is not immune to unexpected death and destruction. The deaths along the coasts in recent days have been a reminder of that. Next week also marks the 350th anniversary of the start of the Great Fire of London. The fire of 1666 is such a famous event in British history and sits so snugly within the traditional narrative of the island story that it can require an imaginative leap to comprehend quite how shocking and disastrous it really was, especially in its impact on what was then a small country with only one really large city.

Yet the bare statistics of the Great Fire are terrible by any standard. Around 13,200 London houses were burned down between 2 and 5 September 1666. Some 80,000 people were made homeless. Eighty per cent of London within the medieval walls was destroyed, including 86 churches, headed by St Paul’s cathedral. The silver lining, a large one, was that human casualties were low; perhaps fewer than a dozen deaths. No firefighter perished, and most people had time not just to evacuate their houses, but to remove many of their belongings too.

An anniversary exhibition at the Museum of London helps bring the fire scarily alive. It also underlines that the impact of disasters endures for years. The traditional narrative about post-1666 focuses on Christopher Wren’s magnificent buildings. It does not dwell so much on the thousands of homeless who lived in tents outside the city for months and years after the fire. Or on the fact that, though appeals were generously supported, the lord mayor of London stole a lot of the money for himself. Great disasters can bring out the best in human beings as well as the worst, now as then, wherever they occur.