
Malcolm Turnbull is right to insist that softening our racial vilification laws should not be a priority right now. Not only for the reason he puts – that there are bigger issues to worry about (which there are). And not because the laws are fine (they are not).
They are too broad. They don’t strike the right balance in that imperfect task of protecting robust, even insulting, speech in a democratic country while at the same time protecting vulnerable groups from being further marginalised through hateful and stereotyped attack.
But Turnbull is right to leave it alone because, evidently, this nation is incapable of having such a discussion with the maturity and nuance it requires. The new proposal from conservative senator Cory Bernardi to amend the Racial Discrimination Act’s 18C provision is polarised before it begins – again. It is politicised – again. It’s caught up in the culture war game in which high-five victories against social justice warriors is all that truly matters. Again.
When this was brought up after the 2013 election, it was attorney general George Brandis who could not help himself, with his self-important “freedom wars” against the “moralising new secular left”. His proposals were so ill-drafted and poorly explained that they collapsed, with even then prime minister Tony Abbott sensing that it was a particularly sensitive time when it came to racial tensions, and that the the divisions Brandis’ hubris had inflamed were not worth the trouble.




The defence of free speech is limited for the anti-18C brigade | Richard Ackland




Bernardi is having another go. He has garnered the support of 20 coalition senators to support his new bill. It will propose more modest amendments than Brandis suggested, and these are the ones the government should have put up in the first place. 
At the moment, the legislation makes it unlawful to do something publicly that is reasonably likely to “offend, insult, humiliate or intimidate” someone because of their race or ethnicity. Bernardi wants to get rid of the words “offend” and “insult”, leaving the more serious impacts of racial vilification alone.
While I don’t doubt Bernardi’s sincerity in believing the laws overreach, the main game he and his supporters seem to love is the the culture game, the glorious fight against the wicked “left”. Bernardi is incapable of speaking about this issue with the heart and understanding it requires, that Jewish Australians, for instance, really do fear antisemitism and the enormous harm that it can cause, harm that goes to their identity and sense of place in this country. Instead, he says those who support 18C have surrendered to “Orwell’s frightening vision” and are members of the “grievance industry”.
He has applauded Senator David Leyonhjelm’s I’m-so-clever complaint about a journalist calling him an “angry white male”. Bernardi thinks the complaint is an awfully smart tactic to expose the social justice warriors for what they are – “racists, bigots and hypocrites”. 
So that’s the Jewish community, is it Cory? Or Indigenous Australians who have felt the long lasting impact of racial abuse? Or Muslims who are holding their collective breath to see what impact Pauline Hanson’s resurrection will have on their sense of safety?
It didn’t have to be this way. There is no reason for this to be a “left-right” slanging match, except that everyone seems to enjoy it so much. There are plenty of people on the progressive side of politics who have long had reservations about 18C, including, human rights lawyers Julian Burnside and Sarah Joseph, journalists and commentators such as Michael Gawenda, Phillip Adams and David Marr. 
The Australian Law Reform Commission concluded that making it unlawful to offend people “unjustifiably interferes with freedom of speech”, even with the 18D exemptions for public debate and artistic expression. 
But the idea of bringing some sort of coalition of people together from all sides of politics to talk about where the balance should be between defending speech, even speech we might find repellent, even speech that hurts and offends, and ensuring there remains a line beyond which speech should indeed be unlawful is not nearly so much fun as a bit of Left bashing and a chance to puff yourself up as a freedom warrior.
The cause celebre at the moment for those who argue that 18C unreasonably restricts freedom of speech is a Queensland case reported in detail by the Australian. QUT administrator Cindy Prior complained to the Human Rights Commission after an incident in 2013 in which she asked three students to leave a computer lab because it was reserved for Indigenous students. One of the students later posted on Facebook: “Just got kicked out of the unsigned Indigenous computer room. QUT (is) stopping segregation with segregation?”. Another wrote that he wondered where the “white supremacist computer lab is”. A clearly offensive post - “ITT niggers” - was attributed to a student who denies he had anything to do with it. All posts were removed after requests from the university.
Prior, an Indigenous woman, claimed the posts were likely to offend, insult, humiliate or intimidate her and other Indigenous people and she claimed around $250,000 in compensation, in part for lost wages. She was distressed and angry at the posts, and the way the university handled them, and has not returned to work. The students say their posts were a legitimate expression of free speech, and that because the case has dragged on for three years, it has caused them significant financial and emotional strain. A federal circuit court decision is due soon.




Cory Bernardi’s racial discrimination revolt supported by up to 20 senators




The case is complicated, and raises one key question about the law – whether it’s too subjective, that someone’s possibly extreme reaction due to past hurt or discrimination should be taken into account, or some kind of “objective” standard as to the likely hurt or humiliation should apply.
But there is no doubt that this case highlights the problems of 18C and how these cases are being handled. It may not be the most important issue the nation faces, but it still matters in a multicultural society which values tolerance and robust free speech on all kinds of contentious social issues. It is dispiriting that we have nobody with the grace and skill to bring people together to discuss all this, to try to work it out, without demonising supporters and opponents as bigots or left-wing hand wringers.
Bernardi must be pleased with his latest attempt. He is getting lots of publicity, lots of air-time, and a platform to present himself as freedom’s saviour. But his bill is unlikely to go anywhere. Given his prosecution of it, that’s no surprise. It doesn’t deserve to.

