
I remember feeling scared after 9/11. A few days after the attacks, a classmate jumped in front of my car and menacingly yelled “go home”. When I looked out the window, everyone turned away. Around the same time, a McDonald’s cashier nearly refused to sell my dad a cheeseburger. He eventually got the burger, but had lost his appetite.
But my family got off easy. In the days and weeks following the attack, many religious and ethnic minorities were bullied, harassed and assaulted. On 15 September 2001, Balbir Singh Sodhi, a Sikh American, was murdered in a violent hate crime in Mesa, Arizona.




I'm a 9/11 widow. Watching the Khans' public heartbreak felt all too familiar | Alissa Torres




I always thought things would get better. I was born and raised in Virginia, played soccer as a kid and went to high school football games with my friends. Apart from my Sikh articles of faith, a turban and beard, I didn’t feel too different from my peers. America was my home.
But 15 years later, I feel worse than I did then. Profiling, hate violence and bigotry now braid through the daily lives of Muslim, Arab, Sikh and South Asian Americans. We are outsiders looking in, forever struggling for equality and understanding.
Black parents know the feeling. They’ve long told their children that they’re different and will experience inequities and discrimination in almost every corner of American life. “The talk” can mean the difference between freedom and incarceration, life and death. 
We now have our own talk with our kids.
It begins with profiling. Guidelines released by the justice department in 2014 explicitly permit profiling at airports and borders. The guidance likewise permits massive data gathering operations, including the monitoring of communities through video surveillance and confidential informants, absent any kind of suspicion. It’s hard to tell our children that we’re equal when we can be stopped by law enforcement officials because of our turbans, hijabs or the color of our skin.
There’s also the suspicious activity reporting program, which directs local law enforcement officers to report activities they believe are indicative of terrorism or illicit activity. Muslim Americans who have placed large purchase orders for computers at Best Buy, searched for video games online, and purchased bottled water from Costco have found themselves ensnared by this sweeping operation. Others find their way onto the terrorist watchlist on the basis of a single social media post. Dearborn, Michigan, a city with a population of roughly 100,000 and known for its large Muslim and Arab American community, has more watchlisted residents than any other city in the US, except New York.
Our adolescents and young adults are acutely vulnerable to profiling. “Becoming confrontational”, “unexpected clashes over ideological differences” or “a new interest in watching or sharing violent material” have been construed as indicators of violent extremism and thus often precede a visit from law enforcement authorities. Other countering violent extremism programs have used indicators such as “talking about traveling to places that sound suspicious”, “using code words or unusual language” and “studying or taking pictures of potential targets”.
Muslim youth who dare to publicly challenge US foreign policy, to speak Arabic in public or to take photos of national monuments run the real risk that they’ll draw the attention of police. In the case of Ahmed Mohamed, the 14-year-old Muslim American student from Irving, Texas, all it took was a passion for engineering and a homemade clock.
If “the talk” begins with profiling, it moves quickly to hate violence – now mainstream, and intensified and exacerbated by government stigmatization. Islamophobia is higher now than after 9/11 and anti-Muslim violence was significantly higher in 2015 than it was prior to 9/11, with Muslim Americans about six to nine times more likely to experience violence now than before. Sikh and Arab Americans are often targeted as well; hate has a rapacious appetite. In the wake of the San Bernardino tragedy, for example, Sikh Americans reported a 200% rise in hate incidents.
Hate crime reporting by police, though, is voluntary, not mandatory, leaving us unable to even understand the scope of what we endure. The Associated Press recently found that roughly 17% of all city and county law enforcement agencies nationwide haven’t submitted a single hate crime report in the last six years. Although discrimination and bigotry will never be eradicated, better data would foster awareness and ensure that community leaders and law enforcement have additional resources to combat hate violence at the local level.
If we don’t speak to our children, the roles often reverse, and they come to us. Sikh and Muslim American children are bullied at twice the national average. It often begins with belittling jokes and quickly descends to name calling, social exclusion and even physical assault. Bullying correlates with sub-par academic performance, low self-esteem, depression and poor health. Bullying isn’t a rite of passage; it’s a form of hate that, left untreated, continues into adulthood. 
So when our children pose the granddaddy question of them all and ask us why politicians are so willing to scapegoat and humiliate our communities, our answer is often simple: so many others treat us differently; why wouldn’t they?

