
Every five years the UN committee on the elimination of racial discrimination (Cerd) reviews Britain’s record on race equality. On Friday it released a report highlighting this Conservative government’s drastic failure to tackle the deeply entrenched disadvantage and discrimination faced by people from Britain’s black, Asian and minority ethnic (BAME) communities.
This is just the latest report to find that structural racism and social mobility remain fundamental issues in 21st-century Britain. The Tories have failed, over successive governments, to properly address the complex and multifaceted issues facing BAME communities. In truth, Tory austerity policies have increased the disadvantages faced by people from these communities.
The Equality and Human Rights Commission (EHRC) recently found a 49% rise in BAME youth unemployment since 2010. The evidence shows inequality is endemic across every area of life in modern Britain, including education, employment and the criminal justice system.




 

Those in the BAME community and EU nationals are increasingly concerned about what our country will be like, post-Brexit




 

But these reports come as no surprise to the BAME community, which has borne the brunt of inequality and disadvantage for generations now – inequality that has been exacerbated by an austerity programme that has drastically cut funding to projects that empower the BAME community.
Theresa May’s public service audit, announced this weekend, is nothing more than political posturing because the government has been told time and again by various reports exactly what and where the problems are. Those in the BAME community do not need an audit to tell them how bad the situation is; they need urgent action by the government to stamp out racial discrimination.
People are worried, with good reason. Those in the BAME community and EU nationals are increasingly concerned about what our country will be like, post-Brexit.
Race, meanwhile, is now the most commonly recorded motivation for hate crime in the UK. Such crimes have soared since the referendum result. The police-funded True Vision website has had a 57% increase in reported cases.
People from ethnic minorities have been contributing to the fabric of our nation for centuries. Despite increasing success in sport, media, the arts, politics, science and business, they still face serious structural barriers, barring many from reaching the top of these fields.
It is time the government took action to tackle the inequality that can paralyse BAME communities, forcing people into poverty, low-paid work and overcrowded housing.
Today Labour renews its commitment by launching a comprehensive race equality consultation document to engage directly with those communities whose daily lives are blighted by racial inequality, disadvantage and discrimination. Their views will help form the basis for action by a future Labour government.
What can they expect from us? We will continue to hold the government to account on race equality. We will work with organisations such as the Runnymede Trust to push ministers to develop a comprehensive cross-departmental race-equality strategy.




Theresa May’s inequality audit seems clever, but it will backfire | Zoe Williams




We want a fundamental rethink of the Prevent strategy, which marginalises the Muslim community by relying too heavily on racial and religious profiling. Labour will put human rights at the centre of its counter-extremism policy. We need a cohesive and inclusive strategy that effectively trains teachers to spot signs of radicalisation, whether Islamic fundamentalism or rightwing xenophobia.
We will continue to oppose the devastating austerity cuts blighting society, and oppose the cuts disproportionately affecting the BAME community because of underfunding of the EHRC, legal aid and the NHS. We will relentlessly push for greater diversity across public life at all levels, and continue to champion equality of opportunity for all. Our Future Candidates Programme will increase the numbers of Labour BAME candidates, and we will act to ensure the parliamentary Labour party reflects the population.
Labour values everyone’s contribution towards making Britain a decent society. That can only be accomplished by ridding our country of racial discrimination, once and for all.

