
My politics were formed in the 1980s in the south Wales community where I grew up, and which I’m now proud to represent as its member of parliament. They are traditional British Labour politics: a belief in social solidarity and equality, in freedom and responsibility, in security and prosperity for all, and an undying faith in democracy and the Labour party as the only means to achieve any of it.
That faith was never blind, it comes from our history of delivering material social and economic progress for the people of our country, through winning the arguments and winning power. Our record of achievement, from the creation of the NHS and comprehensive education to the advent of a minimum wage, is why Labour can proudly claim to be the greatest movement for economic justice and social mobility that Britain has ever created. And it is precisely that history and its precious legacy that is at risk in this campaign.




Why Labour is putting energy reform at the heart of its green agenda | Jeremy Corbyn




The greatest lesson that we can take from our history is that we can only implement our vision and apply our values when we win power and form a government. And today, with Jeremy Corbyn as our leader, even in the sixth year of a radical, rightwing and failing Tory government, the straight-talking truth is that we look further from power than we have done for generations.
The reason I am running in this campaign is that I am not prepared to sit by, as I was forced to in the 1980s and 90s, and see Labour’s legacy dismantled by the Tories, as we turn inwards, away from unity, away from voters and away from any prospect of power. It’s not just the Labour party that can’t afford to make that mistake again, the people who need a Labour government now can’t afford us to make that mistake.
They are not interested in some soap opera about the PLP or the leaders’ office. They don’t care about Momentum’s Marxist critique of the crisis in capitalism, or talk of coups and deselection. What they want is a Labour party that looks like a credible alternative to the Tories. They want a progressive party of the left, with radical plans to even things up in our deeply unequal society, but one rooted in the everyday concerns of the British people. And the way we go about proving we’re up to the task is by being good at our current job of opposition, and looking ready for the next job, as a government.




 

The victories I helped win – on tax credits and disabled people’s benefits – are our most important ones in opposition




 

Now if I felt Corbyn was able to achieve either of those goals, I would still be serving in his shadow cabinet. But I do not, and that is why I am standing to replace him. Because I think the evidence of the last year is that Corbyn, for all his experience, is not suited to the task of opposing the Tories effectively in parliament, still less at building a united Labour team and a credible programme for government. And I believe that I am.
My evidence is the success I’ve had in my short time in parliament at opposing the Tories, on health and social security, on their assault on public services and working people. The victories I helped win – on tax credits and disabled people’s benefits – are our most important ones in opposition. Just as important is my ability to build a Labour team of all our talents. Over 100 Labour MPs nominated me to lead our party, and I would be able to unite us in parliament, as Corbyn cannot.
Finally, there is the policy programme I have brought forward. It’s a plan to turn our anti-austerity rhetoric into a radical but tangible plan for prosperity. A £200bn “new deal” to invest in the schools and skills, hospitals and housing stock that we need. A fair deal on taxation to rebuild an NHS that the Tories has brought to its knees. And a revolution in rights and rewards, increasing security, pay, terms and conditions for millions of British men and women.
But to deliver any of that, we have to win. And with just a few days to go in this contest and with thousands yet to vote, I am asking every Labour member, supporter and trade union affiliate to reflect on our history, to look to our future, and give me your vote and let me lead us back to power.

