So, just when we thought Momentum couldn’t do itself any more PR damage, it announced the launch of “Momentum Kids” this weekend – aptly nicknamed “Tiny Trots” by Lib Dem leader Tim Farron. Whether intentionally or not, let’s not deny that the whole concept has some seriously creepy undertones.

The idea was proposed and set up by two single mothers, aiming to get more women involved in politics. This is fantastic in essence, and a great idea – more women should get involved, and this will provide them with the opportunity. But then it starts to get weird.

According to author Alan Gibson, who will be running some programmes during the World Transformed Festival – the alternative Labour conference run by Momentum – Momentum Kids aims to provide an alternative to “an education system that treats [children] only as future productive drones”.

On offer are campaigning workshops and story-telling sessions; one wonders what this will actually entail. “Make your own placard” workshops? “Dialectical materialism – a Russian tale” in picture form? Deselecting Action Man from the play area for his “red Tory” sentiments? A sing-along to Pink Floyd’s “Another Brick in the Wall?” (To be honest, I’m not that opposed to the latter option, as it is a fantastic song/video and I did know all of the words at age 11).

Momentum has not been particularly forthcoming in discussing the content of these workshops – I’m still waiting for their press representative to come back with the specifics about what those workshops will entail – leaving them open to wild interpretation, as per my own suggestions above. And to me, the notion of “promoting political activity that is fun, engaging and child-friendly” to children as young as three is a rather daunting prospect. Yes, provide breakfast clubs, afterschool clubs and whatnot, to enable parents – who are consenting adults, old enough to make their own decisions – to get involved. But introducing political theory and ideology to young children in return for these basic services to their parents could amount to brainwashing. The thought of legions of children trading insults such as “You’re a Blairite, Tommy!” on the playground gives me the shivers.

The most ridiculous claims made about Jeremy Corbyn







11 show all The most ridiculous claims made about Jeremy Corbyn



















1/11 He called Hezbollah and Hamas ‘friends’ True. In a speech made to the Stop the War Coalition in 2009, Mr Corbyn called representatives from both groups “friends” after inviting them to Parliament. He later told Channel 4 he wanted both groups, who have factions designated as international terror organisations, to be “part of the debate” for the Middle East peace process. “I use (the word ‘friends’) in a collective way, saying our friends are prepared to talk,” he added. “Does it mean I agree with Hamas and what it does? No. Does it mean I agree with Hezbollah and what they do? No.” Reuters

2/11 ‘Jeremy Corbyn thinks the death of Osama bin Laden was a tragedy’ Partly false. David Cameron used this as a line of attack at the Conservative Party conference but appears to have left out all context from Mr Corbyn’s original remarks. In an 2011 interview on Iranian television, the then-backbencher said the fact the al-Qaeda leader was not put on trial was the tragedy, continuing: “The World Trade Center was a tragedy, the attack on Afghanistan was a tragedy, the war in Iraq was a tragedy.”

3/11 He is ‘haunted’ by the legacy of his ‘evil’ great-great-grandfather False. A Daily Express exposé revealed that the Labour leader’s ancestor, James Sargent, was the “despotic” master of a Victorian workhouse. Addressing the report at the Labour conference, Mr Corbyn said he had never heard of him before, adding: “I want to take this opportunity to apologise for not doing the decent thing and going back in time and having a chat with him about his appalling behaviour.”

4/11 Jeremy Corbyn raised a motion about ‘pigeon bombs’ in Parliament This one is true. On 21 May 2004, Mr Corbyn raised an early day motion entitled “pigeon bombs”, proposing that the House register being “appalled but barely surprised” that MI5 reportedly proposed to load pigeons with explosives as a weapon. The motion continued: “The House… believes that humans represent the most obscene, perverted, cruel, uncivilised and lethal species ever to inhabit the planet and looks forward to the day when the inevitable asteroid slams into the earth and wipes them out thus giving nature the opportunity to start again.” It was not carried.

5/11 He rides a Communist bicycle False. A report in The Times referred to Mr Corbyn, known for his cycling, riding a “Chairman Mao-style bicycle” earlier this year. “Less thorough journalists might have referred to it as just a bicycle, but no, so we have to conclude that whenever we see somebody on a bicycle from now on, there goes another supporter of Chairman Mao,” he later joked.

6/11 'Jeremy Corbyn will appoint a special minister for Jews' False so far. The Sun report in December was allegedly based on a “rumour” passed to the paper by a Daily Express columnist who has written pieces critical of the Labour leader in the past. The minister did not materialise in his shadow cabinet.

7/11 ‘Jeremy Corbyn wishes Britain would abolish its Army’ False. Another gem from The Sun took comments made at a Hiroshima remembrance parade in August 2012 where Mr Corbyn supported Costa Rica’s move to abolish it armed forces. “Wouldn’t it be wonderful if every politician around the world…abolished the army and took pride in the fact that they don’t have an army,” he added. The caveat that “every politician” must take the step suggests Mr Corbyn does not support UK disarmament just yet.

8/11 Jeremy Corbyn stole sandwiches meant for veterans False. The Guido Fawkes blog claimed that the Labour leader took sandwiches meant for veterans at at Battle of Britain memorial service in September but a photo later emerged showing him being handed one by Costa volunteers, who later confirmed they were given to all guests.

9/11 He missed the induction into the Queen’s privy council True. After much speculation about Mr Corbyn’s republican views and willingness to bow to the monarch, his office confirmed that he did not attend the official induction to the privy council because of a prior engagement, but did not rule out joining the body.

10/11 Jeremy Corbyn refuses to sing the national anthem. Partly true. The Labour leader was filmed standing in silence as God Save the Queen was sung at a Battle of Britain remembrance service but will reportedly sing it in future. Mr Corbyn was elusive on the issue in an interview, saying he would show memorials “respect in the proper way”, but sources said he would sing the anthem at future occasions.

11/11 He is a member of the All-Party Parliamentary Group for Cheese True. The group lists its purpose as the following: “To increase awareness of issues surrounding the dairy industry and focus on economic issues affecting the dairy industry and producers.”

I don’t know about you, but I feel a little bit uneasy about the mass indoctrination of children from such a young age, when they should be provided with the freedom to form their own views organically. A well-rounded education, which includes many opposing viewpoints and theories, underpins the concept of debate. To simply provide a one-sided narrative breaks that concept down.

Quite rightly, the Momentum Kids programme intends to provide crèches and childcare for women who do not have the time to get involved in political activism because of their “traditional caring roles” – women have the right to be more involved in political activism, if they wish, after all. By providing childcare, Momentum is mobilising a whole new unit of members who previously may not have had the chance to get involved – or weren’t particularly interested in politics, since no party provided concrete assistance for them to get involved. The “democracy” gap is real, and I’m happy to see it being tackled by any group, even if it is Momentum. Nevertheless, political parties making themselves responsible for childcare should always be viewed with suspicion in my book.

Thankfully, we know that when children are told to think or believe one thing, they often go in the complete opposite direction once they hit adolescence – so Tiny Trots might accidentally lead to a generation of flat-capped, tweed-clad Tiny Tories. Which prospect is the more frightening? We’ll just have to wait and see.

Update: Press representative has now come back to me, and confirmed that "banner making" workshops will be taking place at Momentum Kids events