Some gripes about banks are universal. From the sage of 19th century America, Mark Twain, comes this evergreen: “A banker is a fellow who lends you his umbrella when the sun is shining and wants it back the minute it begins to rain.” But when it comes to Britain’s high street banks, the charge sheet can be much more specific – and far longer. During the boom, these institutions shunted huge amounts to the wrong places, paid their top staff top dollar and were leading players in the tax-avoidance game. Some did worse: money-laundering, rigging markets. Then, when everything went belly-up, they came to the British taxpayer for trillions in loans, guarantees and cold, hard cash.

Disparate these complaints may be, but unifying them is one theme: that Britain’s banks rely on the protection of the British public but reliably work against their interests. In less than two decades, there have been 11 official investigations into our banking industry. As far back as 1999 Donald Cruickshank calculated that the big banks were racking up “super-normal profits” of up to £5bn each year. Twelve years later, in the first major probe into finance after the crash, John Vickers concluded that the banking market was still uncompetitive. Last year, the chair of the Treasury select committee, Andrew Tyrie, said: “The public have concluded that they have been ripped off by banks for years, and there is a good deal of evidence that many of them may be right.”

It’s against that backdrop of deep popular, expert and political unhappiness with our banks that Tuesday’s final report from the competition watchdog must be judged. It was inevitably never going to match up. Still, for a report that cost around £5m, took nearly two years and weighs in at 708 pages (not counting appendices) it represents pitifully poor value. Yes, the banking market is uncompetitive, admits the watchdog, with the big players having too many advantages over smaller challengers. And so it will unleash an “open banking revolution” – which turns out not to be a storming of the Winter Palace but a smartphone app, that will let customers know about the best deals in banking. An app! Fancy that. One might almost imagine that the money supplements and price comparison websites hadn’t been around for donkey’s years. One might forget all those reports showing that the banking market is resistant to competitive pressure – once again, it’s up to the consumer to fix a broken market.

Such peashooter solutions are sadly the Competition and Markets Authority’s stock in trade – and raise major doubts about its usefulness as a watchdog. What would a competitive banking industry look like? It would be one in which the big banks were broken up. Where the state-owned institutions were mandated to lend more to the real economy and businesses outside the capital, rather than betting mainly on the London housing market. Where the entire industry was compelled to start a cash pot for social enterprises to tap into. And in which the invisible cross-subsidy of current accounts was exposed as a sham.

Theresa May took office promising to reform capitalism to make it work for the many not the few. That is the big task facing the right wing, and not just in Britain. Doing so means fixing our lazy banking sector and, it is clear, overhauling our competition regulation to make it far tougher.