
Labour’s opponents like to call it the party of welfare, but for years the opposition has said almost nothing new about social security. Intellectual torpor, fiscal constraint and public stigma regarding benefits have given rise to a purely defensive posture. Under both Ed Miliband and Jeremy Corbyn, Labour has opposed cuts to its own old policies, but has had no agenda for how social security should get better over time.




Life after community death: this food bank has a lesson for Labour | Aditya Chakrabortty




Now that George Osborne no longer frames the debate on public spending, it is time for the left to rediscover its nerve and ambition. Over the course of this decade an already improving system for pensioners will grow stronger still and a typical state pension will soon pay over £10,000 a year. But social security for children and working-age adults is a disaster. The system will be far less generous in 2020 than it was in 2010 – and unless there is reform it will carry on getting worse in the decade that follows.
With all the cuts combined, the living standards of families without work will fall by between 10 and 20% during the 2010s. By 2020 the disposable income of a single jobseeker will be barely greater than the tax relief that the state gives to a full-time worker. This is because, while benefits have been cut, tax allowances are rising in value by 80%, revealing today’s double standards on “austerity”.
Then, in the 2020s, benefits are to be linked only to inflation, which means lower-income families will not share in whatever rising national prosperity we see over the next 15 years. Child poverty will return to levels last seen under John Major, rising rents will lead to a large increase in homelessness, and for many, incomes will rise very significantly at the state pension age.
None of this is inevitable, however, particularly in this time of political and economic flux. In place of today’s piecemeal resistance, Labour must call for a long-term plan to raise the living standards of low- and middle-income families. A process is needed that mirrors the Turner Commission on pensions of the mid-2000s, which established an enduring consensus on retirement incomes.
But to make that happen, the left must find the confidence to explain why social security is important. If the share of GDP that the nation spends on working-age benefits is constantly shrinking, as Conservative policies intend, it is arithmetically impossible for the living standards of low- and middle-income families to keep up with rising national wealth.
Benefits are not just a vital last resort, to prevent destitution for a small minority. They matter as much for low earners as for people without a job, and they are something almost every one of us relies on at some point in our lives, to insure against unpredictable risks and provide support when our living costs are high. Higher wages, full employment, childcare or housebuilding can never be a substitute for these functions, no matter how desirable they are in themselves. They are complements not alternatives to social security.
A report published today by the Fabian Society seeks to trigger the long-term debate that is needed. It asks how to make social security for non-pensioners more like our generous but sustainable pension system. There are dozens of proposals but the report’s main point is that social security can serve everyone better, while also doing more for people with the lowest incomes.




Our welfare state shouldn’t be a source of shame, but of pride – and fury | Rhiannon Lucy Cosslett




This can be achieved without spending a higher share of GDP than today, particularly if we start to integrate benefits and tax reliefs. For example, the report shows how the percentage of national income currently devoted to tax allowances could be used to gradually introduce flat-rate credits instead. They would be paid to all adults and children, on top of existing benefits, as a partial basic income.
The plans also seek to break down the artificial divide between pension and non-pension entitlements, particularly when it comes to national insurance benefits and support for people with long-term disabilities. Benefits for unemployment, sickness and maternity, which have been earned by contribution, and payments for disabled people with little prospect of work should match the state pension.
Alongside more generous national insurance benefits, there should be a role for the private sector too, as is the case with our pension system. This would not replace taxpayer-funded support, but add another contribution-based layer. The Fabian report calls for a new scheme to help people with low and middle incomes save automatically, and it suggests there could be private insurance against losing your job, alongside better national insurance protection.
Together, these ideas would transform social security. Instead of a mainly means-tested system, we would have tiers of support, combining contributory, citizenship-based and income-related entitlements, as well as private top-ups. The reforms would both tackle poverty and restore public confidence, by offering something for us all. With enough ambition, social security for children and working-age adults can become successful and popular, just as it is for pensioners.

