Sadiq Khan has waded into the Labour leadership election delivering a blow to Jeremy Corbyn’s campaign. The Mayor of London had been expected to remain neutral throughout, but he has instead opted to endorse Owen Smith and offer up his brutal opinion on Corbyn, too: he “totally failed” to communicate his message during the EU referendum, and is “unable to organise an effective team.”

Unlike the vocal criticism of other MPs, Khan’s words are likely to have a lasting impact on the future of the Labour Party. His relationship with Corbyn, one suspects, is irretrievably damaged.

The issue for Khan, and for Labour, is that, despite his intervention, the chance of Owen Smith actually winning the leadership election remains negligible. He might pull it off – it would be rather daft to put total faith in the predictions of opinion pollsters after their performance in recent years – but, on the face of it, a strong Corbyn victory remains the most likely outcome of the contest.

If Corbyn wins it is safe to assume he will remain leader until the 2020 election. In which case, we have a situation where Labour’s highest profile and most powerful politician is publicly at odds with his leadership.

All of Corbyn’s opponents (and there are many) will side with the London Mayor. The coming months and years, then, will be characterised by the battle of Corbyn vs Khan. And that is neither good for the party or the country.

We need a Leader of the Opposition who is focused on holding the Government to account and we need a Mayor of London who is focused on working in the best interests of London. The distraction of a protracted popularity contest, a tussle between the two big figures of the party, is a waste of time and energy. Khan’s words have doomed Labour to an even longer civil war than the one to which it had already, ill-advisedly, committed itself.

In pictures: Jeremy Corbyn reshuffle







11 show all In pictures: Jeremy Corbyn reshuffle



















1/11 Jonathan Reynolds,Shadow Railways Minister: RESIGNED He resigned as shadow railways minister in protest at the reasons for sacking Pat McFadden

2/11 Kevan Jones, Shadow Defence Minister: RESIGNED He resigned as a shadow defence minister who strongly supports renewal of Trident. Has spoken out against Jeremy Corbyn’s leadership before and was also the centre of a row with Ken Livingstone after he said Jones “might need some psychiatric help” (Jones has previously spoken about his struggle with depression)

3/11 Stephen Doughty, Shadow Foreign Minister: RESIGNED He quit as a shadow foreign minister in protest at the sacking of his colleague Pat McFadden as shadow Europe minister. He said he had “looked at his own conscience” and decided to step down

4/11 Pat McFadden, Shadow Europe Minister: SACKED He was sacked as shadow Europe minister for "disloyalty" to leader Jeremy Corbyn

5/11 Pat Glass, Shadow Europe Minister: SAFE Former junior shadow education minister Pat Glass replaced Pat McFadden as shadow Europe minister

6/11 Emily Thornberry, Shadow Defence Secretary: SAFE She was promoted to shadow defence secretary. She is anti-Trident and therefore more in tune with Corbyn’s stance and replaces Maria Eagle, who was pro-Trident Getty

7/11 Emma Lewell-Buck, Shadow Minister for Devolution and Local Government: SAFE Emma Lewell-Buck was promoted to shadow minister for devolution and local government

8/11 Michael Dugher, Shadow Culture Secretary: SACKED Outspoken critic of Jeremy Corbyn’s leadership, has been sacked as shadow culture secretary for his "incompetence and disloyalty"

9/11 Hilary Benn, Shadow Foreign Secretary: SAFE Hilary Benn remains as shadow foreign secretary, but Corbyn’s team has insisted his role now comes with ‘new conditions’ that he must agree with Corbyn over foreign policy. Benn insists there are no ‘new conditions’ attached to his job and insisted: "I haven't been muzzled. I'm going to be carrying on doing my job exactly as before”

10/11 Maria Eagle, Shadow Culture Secretary: SAFE Maria Eagle, moved from shadow defence to shadow culture secretary as part of Corbyn’s move to make his defence team match his anti-Trident views

11/11 Andy Burnham, Shadow Home Secretary: SAFE Reports linked him to foreign secretary brief, but Corbyn appears to have backed down on sacking Hilary Benn. He does not see eye-to-eye with Corbyn on home affairs such as the Snooper’s charter, but removing your shadow home secretary so soon after starting would have been a dangerous move by Corbyn

Khan is an astute politician, however; he knows full well that Corbyn is the most likely victor in the leadership race. But he has placed himself to serve as Corbyn’s primary opposition and the leading candidate for future leadership. If Corbyn goes the distance and Labour, as we can reliably assume, has a calamitous general election in 2020, the position will certainly be vacated. Assuming Khan does a decent job as Mayor, he becomes the favourite to take over.

As one of the most successful and effective politicians of his generation, this claim isn’t so bold. Khan’s record speaks for itself. Besides being the first Muslim Cabinet minister, he was also the mastermind behind Ed Miliband’s successful leadership campaign. He was initially the outsider to be Labour’s London Mayoral candidate, and yet he went on to topple the mighty Tessa Jowell and beat Tory darling Zac Goldsmith in the polls during a tough year for Labour elsewhere.

Khan’s career is still on an upward trajectory. His success is unparalleled within the current Labour Party at the moment. His endorsement of Owen Smith, then, is a statement of intent. What we have just witnessed is Sadiq Khan throwing down his gauntlet. His hat – if you’ll excuse the mixed metaphors – is now firmly in the ring.