
Four months into his tenure as London’s mayor, it’s already clear that Sadiq Khan faces a wide range of problems. How to manage a city famed for its openness in a country determined to bring the shutters down. How to make it look like he’s kept his promise to freeze fares when it’s blindingly obvious to everyone that he’s doing no such thing.
But the biggest challenge facing Khan is still the biggest challenge facing many of his constituents: the cost of housing. And, as with the fares pledge, the mayor is already being forced to accept that some of the things he promised in the campaign will be completely impossible to deliver.




Even in housing, the Tories stoop to divide and rule | Owen Jones




At last week’s mayor’s question time, Khan backed away from his campaign promise to make 50% of all new homes “affordable housing”, on the not-unreasonable-but-shouldn’t-he-have-known-this-already grounds that it wasn’t allowed under current planning rules. Instead, he said, he’d focus on making viability assessments more transparent, which is a very important and sensible thing to do, but also so boring and technical that I’m going to stop talking about it before you decide to give up reading this and see what’s going on over on Facebook instead.
There are many things that will make it difficult for Khan to solve London’s housing crisis. The relatively limited powers of his office, compared to his peers in New York or Paris. The shortage of brownfield, distrust of high-rise and complete absence of political appetite to extend London’s boundaries, which, combined, mean a crippling lack of land to build on.
But perhaps the biggest challenge facing Khan is the sheer scale of the problem. London’s population is growing by roughly 100,000 a year. In his four years as mayor, London will grow by approximately the size of Bristol. Short of knocking down whole districts of the capital and rebuilding them, higher, it’s not clear how anyone can solve this problem.
Contrast this with much of the rest of the country. It’s not quite true to say that the housing crisis is a London-specific phenomenon: a recent Resolution Foundation report showed that home ownership rates were in freefall all over the country, with the biggest drop of all in Greater Manchester.
But the crisis in the north is as much about the quality and type of housing on offer as it is a simple matter of supply. Many northern cities are barely growing at all. Liverpool, indeed, is still 10% smaller than it was in 1981.




Sadiq Khan could teach Labour how a leftwing underdog can win | Dave Hill




The explanation for this is the same as the explanation of London’s boom: people follow jobs, and the best-paid jobs are overwhelmingly located in the capital and its satellites. The current situation is nothing short of an internal brain drain: the north of England has some of the best universities in the world, yet their graduates have an awkward habit of fleeing the region after graduation. In other words, London’s housing crisis, and the north’s economic crisis, are two sides of the same coin. In one half of the country we don’t have enough homes; in the other, we don’t have enough jobs.
It doesn’t feel like it should be beyond the wit of man to come up with a policy that solves both these problems.
What would such a policy look like? It wouldn’t just let the market take its course (we’ve tried that; it didn’t work). Nor would it assume that simply throwing money at city-centre regeneration schemes would be enough to encourage private investment (that didn’t work either). It might do whatever the Northern Powerhouse policy was going to do, but we’ll never know for sure because it never got round to doing it before George Osborne got himself sacked from his job as chancellor.
What it would do, though, would be to move a significant sector of the economy – ideally, one over which the government had total control – out of London to a city that appreciated it more. By doing so, we could relieve pressure on the capital’s scarce housing stock, by opening up a whole swath of central London to redevelopment; while simultaneously giving a massive boost to the economy of, say, Bradford, by giving ambitious graduates an incentive to move there.
At some point soon, parliament will have to move out of the Palace of Westminster before the place starts falling down. Just saying.

