
Today is Equal Pay Day. It marks the amount of extra time since the end of the financial year it has taken women to earn the same amount as men, based on Australia’s gender pay gap of 16.2%. This year it took women an extra 69 days to catch up.
As a society we haven’t made much headway in closing the gender pay gap which has hovered between 15% and 19% for decades. It’s been over 30 years since the Sex Discrimination Act 1984 made it illegal to pay a woman less than her male counterparts for the same work. 
Since then, we’ve seen the fall of the Berlin Wall, the end of apartheid and Australia’s first female prime minister. Yet the gender pay gap persists. 




Jennifer Lawrence and Melissa McCarthy make big money – but men still make more




The gender pay gap is currently 16.2% as calculated by the ABS. That number is based on a comparison of the full time-equivalent earnings of men and women, taking part time work into account. A few factors help to explain it, including a lack of women in senior positions, differences in education and experience and old fashioned discrimination. 
Geography plays a role: pay is more equal in the ACT, where the pay gap is 10.7%, than in Western Australia, where it’s 23.9%. The pay gap differs between industries as well. For instance, it’s much worse in finance (30%) than in retail (11.5%). 
A more complex obstacle is the fact that some industries and occupations are simply paid more. Historically, female-dominated industries such as teaching or social assistance have been paid less than male dominated ones like mining or banking. 
Australia has some of the world’s best data on pay equity, collected by the Workplace Gender Equality Agency (WGEA). That data has already shown that when bonuses, superannuation and other perks are taken into account, the pay gap rises to 24.7%.
There is currently little reliable data in Australia about the pay gap for women of colour or women from culturally and linguistically diverse backgrounds. Overseas, evidence suggests the pay gap for those women is much worse. We do know that for Indigenous women, data from 2011 shows that the pay gap is around 33%. 
The University of Queensland Women’s Collective illustrated this earlier this year with their Feminist Week “gender pay gap” bake sale which charged students differently based on their (statistically) likely future earnings. 
These issues may seem intractable, but the Greens have a simple proposal to make a start: abolish pay gag clauses. Last week, I reintroduced a bill to make sure workers can’t be punished for talking to each other about their pay. 
We know that one of the best ways to end inequality is to throw light on it. Our bill will ban pay gag clauses and make existing gag clauses unenforceable. 
It would make sure that workers are allowed to tell their colleagues what they are paid if they wish to, without fear of retaliation from their boss. The proposed new law would not force anyone to discuss their pay but it would make sure that bosses could not pressure their employees to stay quiet.
I experienced this first hand in my very first job at a commercial law firm where the guy sitting next to me was earning $5,000 more than I was. We were doing exactly the same job and we had equal experience since we were both fresh out of university – where I had got better marks than him! I never would have guessed there was any difference in our pay unless he’d let his salary slip in a casual conversation.
Evidence has shown that pay secrecy can help hide discrimination, unconscious bias and bad decision making, such as where two people are paid differently for doing the same job. Pay transparency makes sure employers have to justify pay decisions. 




Why does the women's rights movement marginalise women with disabilities? | Nidhi Goyal




When pay is set in secret by individual negotiation, women are at a disadvantage. Research suggests that women are less likely to ask for a raise or negotiate aggressively, and are more likely to be judged unfairly by managers. 
Our proposal to allow workers to speak freely has already gained support from academics, lawyers and unions, and I’m looking forward to putting the case strongly for reform. 
All sides of politics say they care about pay equity. In the coming months, a Senate committee will conduct an inquiry into the bill. This is an opportunity for our leaders, and particularly our women leaders, to come together and start to eliminate this inequality.
We can and will disagree on other aspects of fixing the gender pay gap – like the need to increase government funding for higher pay in childcare, aged care and teaching. Regardless of those differences, we should be able to come together to take this small but significant step. 
Senator Larissa Waters is Australian Greens deputy leader and spokesperson on women.

