What I absolutely love about #traingate is the multitude of viewpoints it has elicited. Usually we just have Corbyn lovers and haters, but this time there appears to be so many "bigger pictures". Because of the variety, I’ve taken the liberty of pulling all of them together. Choose your unique #traingate perspective exclusively here:

1. Jeremy lied. There were clearly seats available. He's just using this to further his agenda on public ownership of the railways

2. Establishment smearing

3. Owen Smith called Jeremy a lunatic and he's been let off for that. Imagine if it were the other way round

4. The people calling out #traingate were gladly lapping up #piggate without questioning its accuracy

5. Corbynistas will defend the indefensible

6. Blairites will never stop attacking the Labour leader until they displace him

7. Why did it take Virgin so long to respond? Seeking legal advice for the CCTV tape publishing? Whatever it is, it's certainly fishy

8. The CCTV is photoshopped. They changed the time stamp on the picture to look like Corbyn immediately took a seat after filming his video

9. Jeremy was just being childish. There were scattered single seats vacant but he just wanted to sit next to his wife

10. Surely the commonsense thing to do on a packed train is to sit on an empty reserved seat then move if/when said passenger arrives at their seat

11. If he had sat on a reserved seat, the media would have berated him for being a scrounger or self-entitled

Jeremy Corbyn reluctantly answers question about Virgin Trains CCTV

12. Isn't it impressive that he decided to decline an offer to sit in first class? He is definitely a man of the people

13. Why would you get on a three hour train journey without reserving a seat? This just screams incompetence

14. The pictures were obviously taken at different times. People must've got off the train later in the journey, but it was ram-packed at the start

15. Of course Virgin will stand up against the lies. Jeremy publicly gave the company negative press

16. Surely this brings up bigger issues about fewer services than required, lack of seats particularly at peak times and exorbitant rail costs

17. There are so many important things happening currently and this non-story is trying to deflect from that

18. Jeremy claims to be honest and genuine. Guess he's just like every other politician

19. I really don't care who did or didn't get a seat

20. This is obviously Branson trying to lay into Corbyn due to his vision of public ownership for the railways

The most ridiculous claims made about Jeremy Corbyn







11 show all The most ridiculous claims made about Jeremy Corbyn



















1/11 He called Hezbollah and Hamas ‘friends’ True. In a speech made to the Stop the War Coalition in 2009, Mr Corbyn called representatives from both groups “friends” after inviting them to Parliament. He later told Channel 4 he wanted both groups, who have factions designated as international terror organisations, to be “part of the debate” for the Middle East peace process. “I use (the word ‘friends’) in a collective way, saying our friends are prepared to talk,” he added. “Does it mean I agree with Hamas and what it does? No. Does it mean I agree with Hezbollah and what they do? No.” Reuters

2/11 ‘Jeremy Corbyn thinks the death of Osama bin Laden was a tragedy’ Partly false. David Cameron used this as a line of attack at the Conservative Party conference but appears to have left out all context from Mr Corbyn’s original remarks. In an 2011 interview on Iranian television, the then-backbencher said the fact the al-Qaeda leader was not put on trial was the tragedy, continuing: “The World Trade Center was a tragedy, the attack on Afghanistan was a tragedy, the war in Iraq was a tragedy.”

3/11 He is ‘haunted’ by the legacy of his ‘evil’ great-great-grandfather False. A Daily Express exposé revealed that the Labour leader’s ancestor, James Sargent, was the “despotic” master of a Victorian workhouse. Addressing the report at the Labour conference, Mr Corbyn said he had never heard of him before, adding: “I want to take this opportunity to apologise for not doing the decent thing and going back in time and having a chat with him about his appalling behaviour.”

4/11 Jeremy Corbyn raised a motion about ‘pigeon bombs’ in Parliament This one is true. On 21 May 2004, Mr Corbyn raised an early day motion entitled “pigeon bombs”, proposing that the House register being “appalled but barely surprised” that MI5 reportedly proposed to load pigeons with explosives as a weapon. The motion continued: “The House… believes that humans represent the most obscene, perverted, cruel, uncivilised and lethal species ever to inhabit the planet and looks forward to the day when the inevitable asteroid slams into the earth and wipes them out thus giving nature the opportunity to start again.” It was not carried.

5/11 He rides a Communist bicycle False. A report in The Times referred to Mr Corbyn, known for his cycling, riding a “Chairman Mao-style bicycle” earlier this year. “Less thorough journalists might have referred to it as just a bicycle, but no, so we have to conclude that whenever we see somebody on a bicycle from now on, there goes another supporter of Chairman Mao,” he later joked.

6/11 'Jeremy Corbyn will appoint a special minister for Jews' False so far. The Sun report in December was allegedly based on a “rumour” passed to the paper by a Daily Express columnist who has written pieces critical of the Labour leader in the past. The minister did not materialise in his shadow cabinet.

7/11 ‘Jeremy Corbyn wishes Britain would abolish its Army’ False. Another gem from The Sun took comments made at a Hiroshima remembrance parade in August 2012 where Mr Corbyn supported Costa Rica’s move to abolish it armed forces. “Wouldn’t it be wonderful if every politician around the world…abolished the army and took pride in the fact that they don’t have an army,” he added. The caveat that “every politician” must take the step suggests Mr Corbyn does not support UK disarmament just yet.

8/11 Jeremy Corbyn stole sandwiches meant for veterans False. The Guido Fawkes blog claimed that the Labour leader took sandwiches meant for veterans at at Battle of Britain memorial service in September but a photo later emerged showing him being handed one by Costa volunteers, who later confirmed they were given to all guests.

9/11 He missed the induction into the Queen’s privy council True. After much speculation about Mr Corbyn’s republican views and willingness to bow to the monarch, his office confirmed that he did not attend the official induction to the privy council because of a prior engagement, but did not rule out joining the body.

10/11 Jeremy Corbyn refuses to sing the national anthem. Partly true. The Labour leader was filmed standing in silence as God Save the Queen was sung at a Battle of Britain remembrance service but will reportedly sing it in future. Mr Corbyn was elusive on the issue in an interview, saying he would show memorials “respect in the proper way”, but sources said he would sing the anthem at future occasions.

11/11 He is a member of the All-Party Parliamentary Group for Cheese True. The group lists its purpose as the following: “To increase awareness of issues surrounding the dairy industry and focus on economic issues affecting the dairy industry and producers.”

21. The fact that Branson and Virgin have hit back about this suggests they are fearful that a Corbyn government is likely

22. There were passengers giving eyewitness accounts backing Corbyn. There are pictures to prove it

23. It's illegal for a company to release CCTV images of a public figure unless legally obliged

24. Just because those seats appear empty doesn't mean they are. People may have reserved them with bags, or they could have been occupied by children so we can't see their heads

25. If you can't ask people to move a bag or two you have no business running the country

26 Why couldn't he go on a peak time service and have indisputable imagery of its overcrowdedness?

27. All politicians spin/lie to an extent

28. RAM-PACKED ISN'T EVEN A WORD. It's either rammed or jam-packed

NB: There is no guarantee that more viewpoints won’t emerge after this piece is posted. After all, #traingate is the gift that just keeps on giving.