




Tell us how you got here: share your stories of immigration




My American adventure started in Mansfield Woodhouse, Nottinghamshire, in the United Kingdom. I was heartbroken after a long, passionate relationship had come to an end. I went on online and there I found Sabrina, a redhead with chromed steel eyes who lived in Ohio. We spent the next six months courting each other in online chatrooms with dark and bloody poetry, philosophical and political conversation. We shared something neither of us ever had before. 
Circumstances conspired for us to be together. Shortly after, I found myself on a jet, headed for Cleveland, Ohio. I remember that I grinned when I saw her at the airport. It only took three months before we were married. Now, 14 years later, we are still together. Our wedding song was (and is) Metallica’s Nothing Else Matters. Tells you all you need to know.
After arriving, I got a job driving an ice cream truck through the housing projects in Painesville, about 40 miles from Cleveland. That was an eye-opener. Abject poverty, astounding violence. A guy came up to the truck, waved a little bag full of white, crystalline powder at me, demanded $20 and an ice cream. I said he’d got it wrong: he gave me money, I gave him an ice cream. He looked at me like I was crazy, grinned at me with a mouth full of gold, shook his head and left. It took me a while to realize what had happened. 




I was a Soviet defector. Chess was my door to freedom | Lev Alburt




I got a job in Virginia, drawing maps for utility companies. Over the next 10 years I earned between $50,000 to $70,000 a year. We spent most of it on liquor, drugs and rock n’ roll. We always lived in the ghetto, down where the real people are. On Lenmore Street, on Richmond’s South Side – the only white faces for 10 blocks in any direction. 
Soon enough, Sabrina’s father, a good ol’ Republican white man, started whining about his daughter living down in a “black neighborhood”. We moved into a place we couldn’t afford, even on $70,000 a year, surrounded by the “normal right-living white folks” he always wanted us to be part of. But normal is a town I never wanted to visit.




I am a 'Dreamer'. I walked 1,500 miles for the right to stay in America | Carlos Roa




Things went south from there. My job was outsourced to India. We lived on my unemployment and Sabrina’s social security check. Down from $70,000 to less than 10. And try as I might I could not get another contract. I discovered I wasn’t just outsourced, I was redundant, obsolete.
So we moved back to Ohio and spent 10 months living in the loft of my in-laws. I got a job caring for a houseful of mostly elderly men suffering from mental development issues at $10 an hour. I fell in love with them, especially Old Joe. I took him to the hospital when he had to go. I nearly got myself arrested for raging at the candy-stripers when they wouldn’t give him a sedative to ease his terror. I sat vigil with him, and held his hand as he died. I loved that old man. I miss him still.
That job fell apart for reasons that are no one’s business but mine, my former employer’s and my lawyers, who assure me that I’m going to get payback in court. Yes, I have become a part of America’s culture of litigation.
What else? I became a citizen in 2009, one of the proudest achievements I can boast of. I own guns. And big dogs (they’re sweethearts, but don’t you look crosseyed at their Momma. They will not be happy.) And I’m getting ready to move into a trailer park. And I’m back where I started, driving an ice cream truck, this time through Colinwood, East Cleveland, back among the poor people I love.
And I’m going to write-in Bernie Sanders in the election, because nothing could persuade me to vote for either of those two sock-puppets, Clinton and Trump. And, guess what? I love America, and nothing could ever persuade me to go back.




I wasn't a poor immigrant. Coming to America hurt me financially | Saskia Tchiboukdjian-Wilson





