
On 6 May Sadiq Khan became the new mayor of London. But how has he fared, 100 days on? Nine people have their say. Share your views in the comments.
Daniel Faehndrich, 21, London: It is massively important that Khan is an advocate for equality





Job: medical studentBig issues for London: housing and transport
I have been really impressed with Khan so far. I have seen more from him in the last 100 days (working to promote the economy and equality in the capital) than I saw in eight years of Boris Johnson. I feel like Khan is completely invested in this city – he is not merely concerned with building a career, but genuinely wants to see London remain the world hub it is despite Brexit. What’s impressed me the most is how involved he’s been with the city’s people. During his campaign he was on the streets with Hindu revellers celebrating Ganesh Chaturthi. He was also present during Pride in London this year, and he seems to genuinely want to see the best for everyone in this city, no matter their religious beliefs, sexual orientation or gender identity. In today’s society where, especially recently, people have voiced intolerant views, it is massively important that one of the most influential figures in the world is an advocate for equality.
I would really like to see his promises on the housing crisis and transport prices come to fruition. As a student, I spend a huge amount on rent and travel, and lowering costs would relieve a massive amount of pressure – a pressure that will increase as I continue my studies. 
Jekaterina, 38, London: Khan has been all talk and no action
Job: advertising manager Big issues for London: housing, hate crime and transport 




 

Hate crime has risen dramatically since Brexit and this has not been tackled well enough.

Jekaterina





 

Having a Muslim mayor is a testament to London’s inclusive nature – it’s a city that embraces diversity. Sadiq Khan has done well climbing the ranks of the Labour party and he has been stealthy in his remarks regarding the party’s recent implosion. However, in other respects he has performed badly: Khan has been all talk and no action. Hate crime has risen dramatically since Brexit and this has not been tackled well enough. It’s an issue that has affected me personally: I have been racially abused (I originate from eastern Europe) and my fears have not been allayed by our new mayor. He has not made his presence felt enough. Secondly, Khan has not done anything with respect to the housing market. I’m 38, have worked hard in this country for 12 years, and feel hopeless when it comes to getting my foot on the property ladder. Thirdly, tube fares have not been frozen as promised. What’s more, Khan has taken the credit for the work of his predecessor when it comes to the introduction of the night tube. 
Craig, 30, London: I spend half my wages on rent – what will Khan do to help me?





Job: humanities teacherBig issues for London: housing, transport and cost of living
I voted for Khan and have been impressed by what he has done so far. He is positive and really cares about making London a better city. I also like his plan to extend bike lanes and his comments over the environment (he plans to bring the increased ultra-low emission zone into force in the capital). Some of his election commitments, however, haven’t come to fruition, for example the drop in travel costs. I also don’t like his plans to arm more police. As a teacher I spend more than half my monthly wages on rent and, so far, I’ve not heard what Khan will do to help me.
Claudia Phillip, 47, London: While most politicians seem manipulative, Khan is a man who has principles





Job: tour guideBig issues for London: housing and hate crimes




 

Khan appears to be a man who is genuine in a way many public figures are not

Claudia Phillip





 

In his first 100 days in office, Sadiq Khan has shown great leadership qualities in a way that other politicians haven’t. Post-Brexit, while everyone else was quitting/infighting/grasping after power, Khan promoted calm, rationality and tolerance, and made it clear that London is inclusive and forward-looking, welcoming to its European population. His first public engagement was a stand against antisemitism (attending a Holocaust memorial) and photographs since have shown him involved in inter-faith gatherings. He seems to be genuinely excited and proud to be mayor, and time will tell if he puts into practice all he has promised. Right now, while most politicians seem self-serving and manipulative, Khan appears to be a man who has principles and determination, and is genuine in a way many public figures are not. I am glad I voted for him. 
Aran Lewis, 53, London: So far Khan hasn’t done anything to impress me





Job: PhD studentBig issues for London: housing and sexual and violent crime
I was impressed by Khan’s majority in the mayoral race, but he hasn’t done anything else to impress me yet. Any half-competent politician or marketing professional could have produced the bit of cuddly PR he trotted out after Brexit. Before the election he said his top priority was the housing crisis, but so far he has done nothing about this (apart from a meaningless commitment to 35% affordable housing in new developments). Khan hasn’t even defined what “affordable housing” means. I want to see the rapid and large-scale provision of social housing for rent, a campaign to end right to buy, and a reversal of the eradication of public libraries, currently at its worst in Lewisham and Lambeth.
Kelly, 67, Northampton: I want to live in London but can’t afford it – Khan needs to make fundamental changes
Job: advocateBig issues for London: housing
I think that there have been far too many photo opportunities and not enough policy announcements, especially regarding the housing crisis. He has been very high profile but I would like to see more substance to him. I am hoping to live in London but cannot afford it – Khan needs to get going on fundamental change.





 

He has made an effort to show London as a place that still welcomes people of all backgrounds

Sanjay Ahlawat





 

Sanjay Ahlawat, 49, Cardiff: I’m impressed: he ran a clean campaign despite being attacked
Job: doctorWhen it comes to Khan there’s no buffoonery as there was with Boris, and he is definitely a man of the people for the people. So far he has (thankfully) not hung from a zipwire looking ridiculous and has instead made an effort to show London as a place that still welcomes people of all backgrounds. I’ve been most impressed by his clean image: he ran a clean campaign, despite being attacked by someone running a vile one. He also conducts himself in a civilised and dignified manner. So what if one pledge was broken? At least he showed flexibility and didn’t sink the ship trying to keep his promise – that would be vanity. 
Alexander Bradbrook, 24, London: He needs to do more about the cost of rent





Job: communicationsBig issues for London: housing, environment and cost of living
Sadiq has been very good so far. I think he’s governing for ordinary people and I’m happy to see him challenging and fully scrutinising some of Boris’s ridiculous decisions (such as the garden bridge and tower blocks full of unaffordable housing). I’m really happy he’s bringing in the one-hour bus pass and continuing to roll out the cycle superhighways, both of which will save me money and help me get to work more safely.




 

I am paying £620​ a month for a box room in Brixton – Sadiq needs to do more to bring the cost of rents under control

Alexander Bradbrook





 

However, I want to see Sadiq being much more radical on housing. It isn’t enough to simply promise to build more. London has infinite demand, and rents are still going up every month to eyewateringly high levels. I am very disappointed he ruled out rent controls as an option for bringing the market under control – we will never build enough to outstrip demand, so there needs to be a complementary intervention in the housing market to bring down costs. I am paying £620 a month for a box-room in a shared flat in Brixton, the same amount I would pay for a large three-bedroom terraced house in a leafy area of my hometown in Lancashire. Sadiq needs to do more to bring the cost of rents under control, because increasingly more people are being priced out, which is just unfair.
So, in conclusion – I’d say he’s had a good start, but I hope that he is bold going forward and will properly tackle the housing nightmare in London (not just tinker round the edges and let rents rise even higher).
Vikash Hansrani, 34, London: Boris made the London mayor role look like a joke





Job: directorBig issues for London: crime, transport and pollution
He is a sensible man with good ideas on how to make London a better city for all. He seems to critically analyse a situation, rather than just jumping in like Boris , saying whatever will make headlines. If I had anything negative to say it would be that he is too reserved, and needs to be constantly pushing to improve things. Boris made the London mayor role look like a joke. It is not a joke, it is a serious job, and as long as Khan takes it seriously then Londoners will be better off. 


