Now that the Olympics in Rio have found their stride, the sports commentators have taken over and the politics has – mostly – been eclipsed. Something similar happened with the Sochi winter games. The moment the skiers started lining up at the top of the snow-clad mountains, the Western outcry about LGBT rights in Russia went quiet (and we have not heard that much about it since).

Whether this is a good or a bad thing I leave you to judge; the point is that, once the Games start, the drama of the sport takes over and speaks for itself.

For several hundred Russians, however, there will be no sporting drama in Rio. And I am not talking primarily about those excluded by the International Olympic Committee from the Games now in progress. I am talking about the 267 Russian athletes across 18 sports who were due to take part in the Rio Paralympics next month.

Following a decision of the International Paralympic Committee of 8 August – almost drowned out by the excited cheers now ringing out from Rio – the whole of Russia’s Paralympic team has been banned.

In what has been described by many athletes and commentators as an admirable and courageous move, contrasted with the supposedly wimpish compromise made by the IOC over Russia’s able-bodied team, all Russia’s aspiring Paralympians will have to stay at home. There will be no Russian anthem and no Russian flag at the Paralympic Games.

Rio 2016 Olympics - in pictures







74 show all Rio 2016 Olympics - in pictures

















































































































































1/74 Day Eight Andy Murray celebrates his victory over Kai Nishikori to reach the men's Olympic final. Getty

2/74 Day Eight Jessica Ennis-Hill continues her bid for gold in heptathlon. Getty

3/74 Day Eight Usain Bolt breezed through his 100m heat. Getty

4/74 Day Eight Team GB took silver in the women's eight. Getty

5/74 Day Eight The men's eight gold took Great Britain top of the rowing medal table. Getty

6/74 Day Seven Britain's Jazz Carlin secured her second silver of the Games in the women's 800m freestyle, as American Katie Ledecky surged to her fourth Rio gold. Getty

7/74 Day Seven Singapore's Joseph Schooling won his nation's first gold medal with victory in the 100m butterfly as Michael Phelps was denied a 23rd Olympic title. Getty

8/74 Day Seven Sir Bradley Wiggins becomes Britain's greatest Olympian ever as Team GB win gold in the men's Team Pursuit at the Velodrome. AFP

9/74 Day Seven Bryony Page on her way to a silver in gymnastics trampoline. EPA

10/74 Day Seven Heather Stanning and Helen Glover win gold in the women's rowing pairs. Getty

11/74 Day Seven Alex Gregory, Mohamed Sbihi, George Nash and Constantine Louloudis celebrate their success in the men’s coxless four. Getty

12/74 Day Seven Defending champions Great Britain won silver in the Olympic team dressage, as world champions Germany claimed gold. The British quartet - Spencer Wilton, Fiona Bigwood, Carl Hester and Charlotte Dujardin - were beaten into second by 3.334 points. Getty

13/74 Day Six American Simone Manuel became the first black female swimmer to win an Olympic title as she shared the women's 100m freestyle gold with Canada's Penny Oleksiak, 16, after a dead heat. Getty Images

14/74 Day Six Swimming legend Michael Phelps demolished the field in the 200m individual medley to claim his 22nd Olympic gold. Getty

15/74 Day Six Simone Biles takes gold in the Women’s individual all-around artistic gymnastics. Getty

16/74 Day Six Fiji's Vatemo Ravouvou breaks through to score during the Men's Rugby Sevens Gold medal final match against Great Britain. Team GB settled for silver as Fiji romped to gold. David Rogers/Getty Images

17/74 Day Six Callum Skinner, Jason Kenny and Philip Hindes of Great Britain celebrate after winning gold in the men's team sprint. AFP

18/74 Day Six Double act David Florence and Richard Hounslow won their second joint Olympic silver in the canoeing slalom. Getty

19/74 Day Six Victoria Thornley and Katherine Grainger show off their silver medals after the women's double sculls final Getty

20/74 Day Five Max Whitlock poses with his bronze medal Getty

21/74 Day Five Joe Clarke reacts to winning Britain's second gold of thee Games Reuters

22/74 Day Five Jack Laugher and Chris Mears celebrate with their gold medals Getty

23/74 Day Four David Florence suffered heartbreak in the canoe single C1 men's semi-final Getty

24/74 Day Four Andy Murray celebrates his straight sets victory against Juan Monaco Getty

25/74 Day Three Lilly King shows off her gold medal as Yulia Efimova parades her silver AFP

26/74 Day Three Russia's Yulia Efimova (left) looks on as the US's Lilly King (right) celebrates winning the Women's 100m Breaststroke Final earlier this morning Getty

27/74 Day Three Lilly King celebrates after beating her Russian rival Yulia Efimova Getty

28/74 Day Three Michael Phelps takes on Chad Le Clos in the men's 200m butterfly final Getty

29/74 Day Three Michael Phelps says it 'breaks my heart' to see drug cheats at the Olympics Getty

30/74 Day Three James Guy missed out on bronze on Monday night Getty

31/74 Day Three Louis Smith reacts to his pommel stumble which may have cost Team GB a medal Getty

32/74 Day Three Dan Goodfellow (right) and Tom Daley celebrate with their bronze medals Getty

33/74 Day Three Tom Daley and Dan Goodfellow dive into the pool in delight after winning bronze Getty

34/74 Day Three Tom Daley (left) and Daniel Goodfellow performing in the men's synchronised 10m platform final PA

35/74 Day Three Canada celebrate their victory against Team GB on day three Getty

36/74 Day Three Heather Watson leaves the court yesterday after losing her second round match against Elina Svitolina of Ukraine Reuters

37/74 Day Two Carlin proudly shows off her silver medal Getty

38/74 Day Two Carlin reacts after learning that she has won the silver medal Getty

39/74 Day Two Peaty shows off his gold medal with pride Getty

40/74 Day Two Adam Peaty celebrates his gold Getty

41/74 Day Two Andy Murray and Jamie Murray were knocked out of the men's doubles by Thomaz Bellucci and Andre Sa AFP

42/74 Day Two Venus and Serena Williams suffered their first ever Olympic defeat playing together Getty

43/74 Day Two Richard Kruse battling the Russian Timur Safin GETTY

44/74 Day Two Lizzie Armitstead finished fifth in the women's road race PA

45/74 Day Two Anna van der Breggen celebrates winning gold in the women's road race Reuters

46/74 Day Two Annemiek van Vleuten suffered a horrific accident in the women's road race Reuters

47/74 Day Two The women's road race passes along the beach in Rio de Janeiro Getty

48/74 Day Two Andy Murray beat Viktor Troicki 6-3, 6-2 to win his men's singles first round match Getty

49/74 Day Two Serena Williams is through to the second round of the women's singles after defeating Daria Gavrilova Getty

50/74 Day Two Gold medal winner, Hoang Xuan Vinh of Vietnam, center, silver medal winner, Felipe Almeida Wu of Brazil, left, and bronze medalist Pang Wei of China, at the victory ceremony for the men's 10-meter air pistol event AP

51/74 Day Two Rowing was cancelled on day two over fears of sinking and capsizing due to strong winds Getty

52/74 Day One Yusra Mardini has won her heat of the Women's 100m Butterfly but she will not be able to go forward to the semi-final Getty Images

53/74 Day One Britain's James Guy chops through the water Getty

54/74 Day One Kantinka Hosszu of Hungary set a new world record in winning gold in the Women's 100m Individual Medley final Getty

55/74 Day One Samir Ait Said receiving medical help after suffering a badly broken leg Getty

56/74 Day One Yusra Mardini leads the race in the 100m Butterfly heat at Olympic Aquatics Stadium in Rio EPA

57/74 Day One Natasha Hunt scored two tries to inspire Britain to victory against Brazil Getty

58/74 Day One Joanne Watmore scored Britain's first try in Olympic rugby sevens history Getty

59/74 Day One Adam Peaty celebrates after breaking the 100m breaststroke world record Getty

60/74 Day One Adam Peaty broke his own world record in the 100m breaststroke heats and is favourite to win gold on Sunday Getty

61/74 Day One Adam Peaty broke his own world record in the 100m breaststroke heats Getty

62/74 Day One Chris Froome speaks with a bruised Geraint Thomas after the men's road race PA

63/74 Day One Greg van Avermaet celebrates winning gold in the men's road race Getty

64/74 Day One Rafal Majka was caught with just two kilometres to go Getty

65/74 Day One Greg van Avermaet won a sprint finish to clinch Olympic road race gold EPA

66/74 Day One A bullet is marked by Brazilian police in the equestrian media centre Getty

67/74 Day One The peloton make their way along the beach during the road race Getty

68/74 Day One Chris Froome leads away the men's road race along with the rest of Team GB Getty

69/74 Day One The field make their way along the opening stages of the road race Eric Gaillard/Reuters

70/74 Day One Mahe Drysdale of New Zealand had no trouble in qualifying for the men's single skulls quarter-finals Getty

71/74 Day One Rowers warm up under the watchful gaze of the Christ the Redeemer statue Getty

72/74 Opening Ceremony A huge fireworks display signals the end of the Rio 2016 Opening Ceremony. Felipe Dana/AP

73/74 Opening Ceremony Andy Murray leads out Team GB at the Rio Olympics opening ceremony Getty

74/74 Opening Ceremony Gisele Bundchen turns the stage into a catwalk during the opening ceremony AP

To my mind, such a blanket ban is an outrage. It is not just illogical, but unjust and grievously short-sighted.

I personally considered even the partial IOC ban on Russia as too harsh on the grounds that a higher standard of proof was effectively set for Russians compared with their non-Russian peers. But the treatment of Russia’s Paralympians takes the pillorying of Russian sport to a whole new level.

The main justification given by the IPC President, Sir Philip Craven, was that the Russian Paralympic Committee “are unable to ensure compliance with and enforcement of the IPC anti-doping code... even within their own national jurisdiction”. This reduces to an institutional measure a ban that punishes all Russian Paralympians for being part of a sporting system that is tainted.

The team as a whole is being made to answer for the sins of the Russian state – or, to be more accurate, its still largely Soviet-era sports establishment.

It is bad enough that inconsistency has now been piled on inconsistency. After the International Amateur Athletic Federation banned all Russian track and field athletes, the IOC left any ban to the discretion of the individual federations, and the result is as patchy as was feared. Now, the IPC’s blanket ban means that Russia’s disabled athletes, as a group, are being punished more severely than their able-bodied teammates.

There is equal rights for you. And the perversity is not lost, either on the official Russian sports bodies or ordinary Russians.

Lack of consistency, though, is the very least of what is wrong with this ban. If it were only that one international body (the IOC) had made a different decision from another (the IPC) on how to react to the evidence about doping in Russian sport, the disparities would be little more than a bureaucratic mess. But it is much more than this.

Not only has any sense of natural justice – that punishment should fit the crime – been lost, but the likely longer-term effects have been completely discounted. What sort of a message has world sport sent to Russia about rights and opportunities for disabled people?

This argument could apply to any country, but it is particularly pertinent to Russia. Throughout the Soviet period, disabled people were largely banished: hidden away by their families for whom there was little if any state help, or confined to lamentably equipped institutions. To be disabled in any way was seen as detracting from the perfect communist future.

Facilities were negligible. Even such basics as wheelchairs were few and far between. Artificial limbs were primitive, if available at all. In Russian cities even now, you see the occasional elderly amputee being wheeled to a begging pitch on a little trolley. This used to be a more frequent sight, and almost the only visible evidence that disablement existed.

Russian cyclist, once banned for doping, loses out on Gold medal

Changes began in the mid-1980s, in parallel to (and in part as a consequence of) Mikhail Gorbachev’s policy of ‘glasnost’, which ended the taboo on reporting social imperfection. The return, and lobbying power, of injured Afghan war veterans was another factor – as was the growing awareness of how attitudes, and amenities, had advanced elsewhere.

London 2012 was even more of a watershed for Russian Paralympians, as it was for Britons, because they had come from so far behind. Russia sent its largest ever Paralympic team to London. They had state-of-the-art equipment, received exhaustive coverage on domestic television, gloried in their second place in the medal table and were received in the Kremlin as national heroes. The positive transformation continued at Sochi.

True, Russian spectators of Paralympic sport can often only envy the help and equipment that a select elite enjoys. But something similar could probably be said of almost every country that fields a Paralympic team.

And the message is less about super-sports wheelchairs – though it is enlightening to see technology at work – than about models of aspiration and achievement, about the glimpse of a society where everyone is accepted and valued.

And suddenly comes the IPC ban. How are Russians to interpret it, against the real progress made over 25 years? Legislation, alas, runs far ahead of public facilities and social attitudes and disabled people remain less visible in Russia than in some developed countries. But change has been substantial.

Does the Olympic movement really want to tell Russians that a tiny incidence of cheating negates all the rest? With a ban would go Russian Paralympians’ national visibility, their modest commercial sponsorship, and the inspiration they offer to their fellow-countrymen.

Russia is appealing, and it must be hoped that the Court of Arbitration in Sport considers the bigger picture.

Russia’s sporting establishment already knows what it must do about doping. If the indiscriminate ban on Russia’s disabled athletes is upheld, that will say, first, that they are less valued than their able-bodied counterparts, and, second, that the progress Russia has made on disabled amenities and rights, as exemplified by its Paralympian success, counts for nothing.

Is that really the message it wants – or should want – to convey?