
Anjem Choudary was a gift for our media establishment. Here was a man who seemed to have more journalists on speed dial than he had mainstream Muslims. At a Muslim News conference last year Channel 4’s Simon Israel was able to share the latest text message he received from the loudmouth, proffering his outrageous comment of the day.




Anjem Choudary has left a trail of broken families and lost youth | Robb Leech




And yet, while Choudary actively courted, and was given, the oxygen of publicity, he was thrown out of mosques and shunned by Muslims who refused to join his band (often just a handful) of followers who would carry out the latest provocation for the cameras.
His pulpit was not to be found in mosques but on the television screen and in national newspapers. Whether it was burning poppies on Armistice Day or declaring allegiance to the latest terrorist iteration, Choudary never failed to deliver. The impact the media had in recruiting gullible followers should not be underestimated.
I was told by a friend who challenged Choudary’s supporters in north London that these diehards would gleefully clutch the tabloid papers that carried his latest provocation. Choudary’s notoriety allowed him to reach the impressionable and vulnerable young people who felt alienated from the rest of society. We will never know whether any of these were among the 100 or more people he and his followers are said to have inspired into terrorism.
Now that Choudary is out of the fray, who will be the next bogeyman? In some respects he was already yesterday’s extremist, as young people increasingly look to the internet for their extremist fix. Islamic State relies less on middle-men and more on direct communication through social media.
While new measures take hold to limit their appeal in that space, the media must still guard against glamorising these men of violence. Such demagogues should never be given the credibility of being called representatives of the Muslim world. Many of us were shocked, for example, that when Isis came to the public’s attention two years ago, its publicity was done for it by reckless broadcasters falling over themselves to tell us of the latest slick online video.
Choudary’s imprisonment is also a reminder of the shoddy state of counter-extremism in Britain. For years successive governments have struggled to define what extremism was and who they were trying to confront. Hasty and ill-thought-through measures have alienated the very Muslims who kicked out extremists such as Choudary from their mosques. But now he has been locked up without any new legislation being required (albeit in a secret trial with the evidence not shared with the wider public). Why was this not done sooner?
In 2014, Hazel Blears, the architect of the prevention of extremism and radicalisation (Prevent) policy, told Radio 5 Live that a person going to the mosque five times a day was a sign of extremism. Former education secretary Nicky Morgan told Channel 4 News in January that converting to Islam was a sign of radicalisation. And Ofsted issued a report on the implementation of Prevent in schools, highlighting how finding a Qur’an in a young boy’s room was a sign of radicalisation.
It is no wonder that young Muslim children have been considered potential radicals by teachers for simply starting to wear a headscarf, choosing to wear a Palestine badge, or wearing a T-shirt with Arabic writing on it. Numerous parents have even told me that they are considering home-schooling so they can avoid the risk of their children being labelled extremist.




Anjem Choudary was a leader. His conviction will damage terror networks | Raffaello Pantucci




The proposed counter-extremism and safeguarding bill is even more problematic and led to an unexpected alliance of civil society groups, faith communities and leading figures within security and journalism coming together to highlight their concerns.
My belief, shared by many Muslims, is that the counter-extremism fight has become a casualty of an ongoing culture war pursued by ideologues with the ear of the government, bent on denying public space to Muslims who organise themselves. It is one that wrongly paints the life and practice of many Muslims as “conveyor belts” to violence, with the assumption that the more conservative you are, the more prone you are to extremism.
Those sympathetic to this view have claimed that Choudary’s case belies an incredible intolerance in the Muslim community that has been tolerated for too long. Those – including the government – who argue that “muscular liberalism” is the way to tackle this are sadly mistaken. Being illiberal while imposing liberalism challenges the very notions of tolerance and respect that our society claims to espouse. In a liberal democracy, we should never restrict speech unless it incites violence or glorifies terror.
There has long been collusion between sections of the media, who provide an echo chamber to Choudary, and the ideologues who use him to hold sway over government policy on tackling terrorism. It is time to reject both approaches and instead promote saner voices in government to engage with anyone opposed to the likes of Choudary and his infamous band of fanatics.

