
Today’s Twitter controversy is brought to you by JK Rowling, who used the platform to publicly lament the fact that Jeremy Corbyn looks likely to win the Labour leadership election by a landslide. “THIS IS NOT BLOODY FUNNY,” the Harry Potter author tweeted. Well, that’s something she and Corbyn’s most loyal followers can agree on, some of whom summarily responded by describing her as a “filthy liberal” and other unpleasantries.
Rowling is part of a small super-rich elite in a world where billions of people live in abject poverty. In my leftwing paradise, we wouldn’t be able to say that. But then again, in my leftwing paradise, a lot of things would be different. For a start, the Labour party wouldn’t be engaging in a seemingly eternal civil war while tanking in the polls, the public wouldn’t have chosen to align itself with the right every time it’s been asked to vote on something since 2005, and the decline of the industrial working class – and with it the traditional institutions of the left – wouldn’t be happening.
So I guess we’re not living in my leftwing paradise.




 

Much like Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows, brewing tensions in the Labour party have erupted into all-out war




 

I suspect Rowling wants things to be different too. She’s used her substantial platform to speak in favour of the welfare state, drawing on her experiences of writing her first book as a single mother relying on benefits and has paid so much in tax and charitable donations that she was excluded from the Forbes list of billionaires in 2012. Rowling is not responsible for the vast inequalities brought about by global capitalism, and she’s done a great deal more than most of the world’s super-rich in trying to combat them. Her books have also been a hugely positive contribution to the world. I always remember kids in my school who struggled to read being able to identify the words “Harry Potter” on a page. In 2010, Shami Chakrabarti described Rowling’s fifth book, Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix, as a metaphor for the war on terror, saying: “What’s wonderful is that [Rowling] got people reading this – about intrusive surveillance and torture, but also about solidarity and resistance and great human virtues.”
In light of all of this, I would normally argue that Rowling is an ally the left cannot afford to alienate. But these are not normal times for the British left. Much like Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows, brewing tensions in the Labour party have erupted into all-out war: sides have been chosen and battles are being fought. Unlike the fight against Voldemort, however, it’s not clear which Labour supporters are good and which are evil, and both sides have been guilty of unpleasant behaviour and acting in bad faith.




JK Rowling laments Jeremy Corbyn's strong position: 'This isn't bloody funny'




So the row generated by Rowling’s comments is best understood as a microcosm of the Labour party’s general woes, rather than a random attack on a beloved children’s author. The aggression towards Rowling was unwarranted and counterproductive, but she too behaved irresponsibly by identifying fairly anodyne critics to her 8 million Twitter followers, possibly subjecting them to an avalanche of abuse in return. The whole thing has played out like every other Corbyn-related spat between Labour supporters over the last few months: attempts at dialogue and respect have been drowned out by a small minority of aggressors (and believe me, these are not unique to Corbyn supporters), and those aggressors have been painted as representative by their opponents in order to discredit whatever faction they happen to be part of.
This cycle is now so familiar to anyone following the party’s predicament that it is now tedious to behold, and it begs the question: where does the left go once this whole sordid event is over and done with?
It’s clear that the coup against Corbyn has been a disaster, and it robbed Labour of a unique opportunity to hold the government to account for the catastrophic EU referendum result. But once it ends – and for the love of God let that be soon – Labour members will need to figure out where to go next. And that may involve working with people they have been traducing for the last four months.
A good first step would be to tone down the acrimony, recognise that most Labour members are acting in good faith, and that none has the perfect solution. Or, as Dumbledore put it: “Understanding is the first step to acceptance, and only with acceptance can there be recovery.”

