“You're living in poverty, your schools are no good, you have no jobs! Fifty-eight percent of your youth is unemployed! Give me a chance. What the hell do you have to lose?” Donald Trump yells to a largely all-white crowd urging African-Americans to vote for him.

When a TV anchor gently enquires with Trump's advisor as to why the Republican presidential candidate isn’t speaking to black audiences about black issues, the reply is: “Ok, maybe it would have been nice if he went and had a backdrop with a burning car.”

By all of the metrics most professionals use to determine possible voter turn-out Trump rates something like 0-1 per cent among likely African-American voters. This phenomenal rating has not been achieved since 1948 and needs some kind of Hall Of Fame all to itself.

Donald Trump blamed for stoking Islamophobia after imam and assistant shot dead

The Republican Presidential candidate’s exhortation to black people while campaigning in an all-white working class town is the US equivalent of standing in the middle of Anfield trying reach out to Manchester United supporters. To be kind it’s what’s called in the US a “rookie error”.

But it’s yet another reason, as one friend told me “why more black folks will turn out to vote against Trump, than voted for Obama".

For that working class white audience who had come to hear their plight being addressed and their issues articulated, this must have been peak “wtf”.

That he managed to disrespect two groups of marginalised voters at the same time has to be some sort of milestone in US presidential candidate hustings.

Now I’m as far away from being a Trump supporter as anyone can be, but even I have to sit back and marvel at what’s going on.

Donald J Trump has just turned seventy years old. He would have grown up in 60s New York City – the most cosmopolitan city in the country, where all of the country's cultural and political issues collided. He didn’t grow up in some small town.

Donald Trump's most controversial quotes







14 show all Donald Trump's most controversial quotes

























1/14 On Isis: "Some of the candidates, they went in and didn’t know the air conditioner didn’t work and sweated like dogs, and they didn’t know the room was too big because they didn’t have anybody there. How are they going to beat ISIS?" Getty

2/14 On immigration: "I will build a great wall — and nobody builds walls better than me, believe me —and I’ll build them very inexpensively. I will build a great, great wall on our southern border, and I will make Mexico pay for that wall. Mark my words." Reuters

3/14 On Free Trade: "Free trade is terrible. Free trade can be wonderful if you have smart people. But we have stupid people." PAUL J. RICHARDS | AFP | Getty Images

4/14 On Mexicans: "When Mexico sends its people, they’re not sending their best. They’re sending people that have lots of problems. They’re bringing drugs. They’re bringing crime. They’re rapists." Getty

5/14 On China: "I just sold an apartment for $15 million to somebody from China. Am I supposed to dislike them?... I love China. The biggest bank in the world is from China. You know where their United States headquarters is located? In this building, in Trump Tower." Getty Images

6/14 On work: "If you're interested in 'balancing' work and pleasure, stop trying to balance them. Instead make your work more pleasurable." AP

7/14 On success: "What separates the winners from the losers is how a person reacts to each new twist of fate."

8/14 On life: "Everything in life is luck." AFP

9/14 On ambition: "You have to think anyway, so why not think big?" Getty Images

10/14 On his opponents: "Bush is totally in favour of Common Core. I don't see how he can possibly get the nomination. He's weak on immigration. He's in favour of Common Core. How the hell can you vote for this guy? You just can't do it." Reuters

11/14 On Obamacare: "You have to be hit by a tractor, literally, a tractor, to use it, because the deductibles are so high. It's virtually useless. And remember the $5 billion web site?... I have so many web sites, I have them all over the place. I hire people, they do a web site. It costs me $3." Getty Images

12/14 On Barack Obama: "Obama is going to be out playing golf. He might be on one of my courses. I would invite him. I have the best courses in the world. I have one right next to the White House." PA

13/14 On himself: "Love him or hate him, Trump is a man who is certain about what he wants and sets out to get it, no holds barred. Women find his power almost as much of a turn-on as his money." Getty Images

14/14 On America: "The American Dream is dead. But if I get elected president I will bring it back bigger and better and stronger than ever before and we will make America great again." GETTY

So why has Trump turned down invites and failed to return calls to speak to black constituencies – even the ones from conservative circles? It’s just not a great strategy, especially if you listen to African-American talk radio and hear the people who want an alternative to the Democratic Party. It’s sad because Donnie just won’t give them a break.

Could it be that he’s so surrounded by “yes” men and women and his cocooning family, that he can’t see or get beyond any other world-view? Does this tycoon see black people as either down-trodden or menaces?

His track record so far gives us some indication: he’s attacked the Khans, the Muslim-American Gold Star parents; called immigrant Mexicans “rapists”; campaigned on what he calls “extreme vetting for Muslims” which could ban many from entering the US and a host of other things.

Still, I wouldn’t count Donald Trump out. To do that is not only dangerous, it’s stupid. The American electorate is in a restive mood, and you can count on the pro-Trump people turning up at the polling stations in their droves. There could be a “Brexit” surprise in the small hours of 9 November.

If Trump continues to poll with African Americans the way he is now, and former Secretary of State Clinton gets 92 per cent of our vote as projected, in the words of one political forecaster “It’ll be game over for Donald Trump".