
The third successive annual increase in drug-related deaths in England and Wales has been announced by the Office for National Statistics – with the 2,479 individuals who died of illegal drug use in 2015 marking a 65% increase since 2012. But this is not a consequence of a growing drug abuse problem; the use of opiates – which account for 80% of deaths – has halved since the late 1990s.




Drug-related deaths hit record levels in England and Wales




The problem is not legal highs. Despite lurid headlines, NPSs (new psychoactive substances) only account for 4% of legal and illegal drug-related deaths. Neither is it the “failed war on drugs”, the default explanation of the liberal commentariat, as deaths were on a downward trajectory between 2008 and 2012.
According to analysis by Public Health England, what is driving the increase are the increasing age and vulnerability of the heroin-using population, and the inability of the NHS to respond to their needs.
Almost invisibly, overdose deaths have shifted from the world of the 1993 Irvine Welsh novel Trainspotting to a problem concentrated among the middle-aged. Heroin took hold in two epidemic waves in the 1980s and 1990s. At its peak heroin was being used by almost half a million people, typically working-class men aged 18-25 struggling to cope at a time of mass youth unemployment. Subsequent generations continued to use drugs, but turned their backs on heroin, resulting in much lower levels of addiction and associated harm. The heroin-using population halved, leaving behind a fragile remnant of original cohorts living with the consequences of decades of drug and alcohol dependency, inadequate access to healthcare, poverty, mental health problems, poor diet and, most importantly, addiction to smoking.








  

‘Overdose deaths have shifted from the world of the 1993 Irvine Welsh novel Trainspotting to a problem concentrated among the middle-aged.’ Ewan McGregor in the film Trainspotting. Photograph: Polygram filmed entertainment


Heroin depresses the central nervous system and inhibits respiratory function. The more compromised an individual’s overall health, particularly lung function, the more their vulnerability increases. Behaviour that was survivable at 25 has tragic consequences at 50.
Accessing drug treatment halves the likelihood of overdose. Between 1993 and 2001 drug-related deaths more than doubled as a consequence of increasing use and the failure of treatment provision to keep pace. From 2001 increased investment in treatment matched availability to demand. This coincided with the passing of the peak of the 1990s epidemic, resulting in heroin deaths falling from 2001 and remaining broadly stable until 2008.
From 2008 supplies of heroin into the UK became disrupted. As purity declined and price increased, deaths fell by a third. During 2012 and 2013 the heroin drought ended, purity rose, prices fell, and deaths from heroin almost doubled from 579 to the new peak of 1,100 announced today.




 

The NHS has never been good at engaging with excluded populations and delivering services to challenging individuals




 

Action to address the vulnerability of the ageing population is central to halting the rise in deaths. Unfortunately, despite their obvious health need, the NHS has never been good at engaging with excluded populations and delivering services to challenging individuals. Offenders, the homeless and people with fragile mental health, as well as drug users, often have no GPs, make themselves unwelcome at A&E departments, and miss appointments, and the complexity of their health needs is ill-matched to a system structured around specialities. Too often the very people who need the NHS most are those least able to navigate its various pathways. Better integration of drug and alcohol services into the wider healthcare system is one of four things that needs to happen if the rise in deaths from heroin is to be reversed.
Since 2013 drug treatment has been commissioned by local authorities, while the responsibility and resources to manage longterm health conditions lie with mainstream NHS commissioners and providers. The health select committee last week criticised the inadequate mechanisms to integrate the two systems, which not only jeopardises lives but also wastes scarce NHS resources by delaying interventions until problems become acute.
Incentivising local authorities to act by making drug-related deaths part of the public health outcomes framework is another step recommended by the expert group. Third, investment in local treatment systems must be protected. Drug treatment halves the risk of death. Treatment budgets have reduced by 30% since 2013, and if this continues, the system will be put under unsustainable pressure with tragic consequences.
Finally, drug treatment services need to become better at identifying those most at risk, intervening to improve their health and address risk-taking behaviour.
Drug-related deaths are concentrated among the most vulnerable people living in our poorest communities; the rate of death is twice as high in north-east England as in London. These communities are invisible to politicians and the media. Modest investment and commonsense reforms to healthcare delivery could make a dramatic difference, reducing the risk to fragile lives.

