
On Sunday afternoon, Hillary Clinton’s doctor revealed that she had been diagnosed with pneumonia two days earlier. The admission came after she was filmed stumbling into her van after leaving a 9/11 memorial ceremony early. Pneumonia is a serious illness, but it can be treated with antibiotics.
The incident divided opinion along familiar lines: for the Trumpian right it was confirmation that Hillary is sickly, perhaps far more than she lets on. Some Clinton supporters railed against the press’s obsession with her health, arguing that it feeds conspiracy theories – and why on earth should it matter?
Of course a presidential candidate’s health matters. Both Trump and Clinton can rightly expect scrutiny of their records and fitness for office. But the press also has a duty to place medical problems in perspective.
The effects of the illness may last a few more days, or a month. And the coming hours will be utterly dominated by coverage of it. But the next president is going to be elected for at least four years. Hillary Clinton is sick right now, but her opponent has flaws that won’t disappear with a course of pills. Here’s a reminder of some of the factors that should weigh heavier than a bout of pneumonia.
Donald Trump’s attitude to climate change
The Republican candidate has said he would withdraw from the Paris deal on cutting emissions, and in 2014 referred to the scientific consensus on global warming as “bullshit”, stating that “our planet is freezing”. The 10 hottest years on record have all occured since 1998. 
Donald Trump’s religious test for migrants
In December 2015, Trump called for “total and complete shutdown of Muslims entering the United States”. Since then his position has shifted somewhat; in June he said “I want people that have bad thoughts out” and his finance chairman explained: “It is about Muslims from countries that support terrorism.” The RNC chairman, Reince Priebus, has denied that this would amount to a religious test. 
Donald Trump’s support of torture
In February, Trump said “Torture works. OK, folks?” and has endorsed waterboarding, which was banned by George W Bush in 2006, saying: “I like it a lot. I don’t think it’s tough enough.”
Donald Trump’s attitude towards freedom of the press
He argued that libel laws should be expanded, so that “when the New York Times or the Washington Post writes a hit piece, we can sue them”.
Donald Trump’s attitude towards women
Trump has written that “Women have one of the great acts of all time. The smart ones act very feminine and needy, but inside they are real killers.” He has criticized female public figures for their appearance and retweeted the question: “If Hillary Clinton can’t satisfy her husband what makes her think she can satisfy America?” before deleting it. He also stated that “there has to be some form of punishment” for women who have abortions (he subsequently released a statement that, where abortion was illegal, doctors, not women, should bear criminal responsibility). 
The prospect of Donald Trump as commander in chief
Retired General John Allen has warned of a “civil military crisis where the military could be ordered to conduct illegal activities” if Trump is elected. Former CIA director, Michael Hayden, has expressed concern about how “erratic” Trump is, saying: “He’s inconsistent. And when you’re the head of a global superpower, inconsistency, unpredictability, those are dangerous things. They frighten your friends and they tempt your enemies. And so I would be very, very concerned.” The Trump campaign denies reports that, referring to nuclear weapons, he asked a foreign policy expert, “If we have them, why can’t we use them?” three times during a briefing. 
Donald Trump’s donations to public officials
Trump told the Wall Street Journal in 2015: “As a businessman and a very substantial donor to very important people, when you give, they do whatever the hell you want them to do.” Trump donated $25,000 to Florida’s attorney general, Pam Bondi, a few days after her office said it would review allegations made against Trump University in 2013. The review was ended without any action being taken. Bondi denies any impropriety. 
Mike Pence’s beliefs
The man who will be a heartbeat away from the presidency also questions the expert consensus on global warming, saying the “science is very mixed”. He has refused to say he’s convinced by the theory of evolution. He voted against measures designed to prevent discrimination based on sexual orientation and opposed equal marriage. 

