The Dubs amendment, committing Britain to accepting hundreds of child migrants travelling alone, was passed three months ago this week. So far, just 20 children have come into the country as a result of that promise. Lord Dubs, the Kindertransport veteran who fought for the amendment, has condemned the “shocking” lack of urgency. The government’s promise to make it happen “as soon as possible” sounds meaningless when more than 600 unaccompanied children, some only six or seven years old, are stuck in camps on the outskirts of Calais. They wait – as we report on Wednesday – in the wet, rat-infested and dangerous camp, traumatised by their experiences, with no idea of their future. On Tuesday, the process slowed further when the appeal court ruled that an immigration judge had wrongly allowed a group of three Afghans to come to Britain from Calais while their asylum claim was considered.

UK unlikely to reach target of resettling 20,000 Syrian refugees by 2020 Read more

It is only a week since a report from a House of Lords committee condemned the feebleness of official efforts to resettle unaccompanied children; the peers described a culture of disbelief, fostered by scarce resources, that led to officials refusing to accept that some refugees were underage in order to avoid their obligations to them. Yet they are desperately vulnerable and in need of protection: Save the Children found that many of the minors it helped in Italy had sexually transmitted diseases. Of the 26,000 who arrived in Europe last year, 10,000 may have disappeared – trafficked into the sex industry or some form of domestic slavery.

In another report, published on Wednesday after a year-long inquiry, MPs on the home affairs select committee renew the attack on Britain’s handling of the refugee crisis across a wider front. They condemn the squalid and unhealthy conditions that prevail in the camps that lie on the borders of two of the richest countries in Europe; they question the way that refugees who have family ties with Britain are dealt with so lethargically, with the UK blaming France and France blaming the UK for the lack of urgency in processing applications for family reunion. They argue for an efficient route for legal immigration including humanitarian visas, and call for the government to allow family reunification visas to be issued in the country of origin so that women and children are not forced into paying smugglers large sums of money before embarking on their dangerous voyages. They warn that on current progress, the target of 20,000 vulnerable Syrians resettled in Britain by 2020 will be missed.

The vast movement of people fleeing to Europe in the hope of escaping war and destitution is unprecedented. It is a tragedy for the refugees but not a surprise for its citizens that the EU has struggled to find a coherent, collective response. Official anxiety to avoid doing anything that might encourage migrants to make the dangerous journey to Europe is understandable; the effort that has gone into making camps in countries neighbouring Syria habitable is laudable. Contentious as the deal with Turkey to prevent refugees setting sail is, it does appear to have slowed the flow across the lethal stretch of water dividing the country from the Greek islands. In contrast, many more – well over 200,000 so far – are making the longer and even riskier journey from Libya and Egypt to Italy with at least 3,000 having already died in the attempt.

It is not easy, but so much more could be done. Councils are only slowly and patchily fulfilling their obligations: scores have not taken any refugees at all. The charity Home for Good, which helps to recruit and train foster families, reports that only Kent, the arrival point for hundreds of unaccompanied children, has an adequate system for managing the inflow. It took 10 months for the family that Justin Welby, the archbishop of Canterbury, is sponsoring to arrive. The new home secretary, Amber Rudd, could start with a promise: that the children marooned at Calais will not endure another winter there.