Let us begin with a paradox: more people are in work than at any time in British history, yet British workers rank among the most insecure and stressed in Europe. They want more hours and better pay. Key to all of this is an apparently new kind of employer, fuelled by billions in venture capital and marked by a new precarity among the people who work for them. The big names are well known to many of us. They deliver packages and takeaways up and down the country and pick up customers who want a lift. They include delivery group Hermes – which, it was revealed this week, faces a probe by Her Majesty’s Revenue and Customs – Deliveroo and Uber.

Such businesses are often referred to as the “gig economy”, a term that summons up images of groovy, footloose, free-spirited work. The reality is far more pedestrian and often straightforwardly grim. This is piecework, in which drivers and couriers are paid by the ride or the drop. The wages are highly variable and the protections are threadbare. Some workers might welcome the flexibility and the stepping-stone to better opportunities. For others the gig economy is a trap – a poverty trap.

Two months ago, the Guardian found that some couriers for Hermes were getting paid less than a living wage. Peter Jamieson, a driver for the company, recounted how his wife was diagnosed with inoperable cancer and he asked to swap delivery days on his rounds so he could attend her hospital appointments. “They told me everyone has problems … and I would never work for Hermes again … there was no compassion,” he said.

The gig economy includes some big names and has drawn in major investment; Hermes commands a fleet of 10,500 couriers such as Mr Jamieson. Deliveroo, which has also been hit by wildcat strikes by drivers, is one of the best-funded startups in Europe. Out of the 2.6 million people who have gained a new job since David Cameron moved into No 10, more than a third – 900,000 – were classed as self-employed. Many of these were not would-be Richard Bransons and Alan Sugars – they were going off into the gig economy. Statisticians do not have a clue about the scale or the scope of the gig economy, just as they do not know precisely how many workers are on a zero-hours contract, that other totem of the new jobs market.

The big trade unions that have been gathering at Brighton this week for the TUC congress have largely failed to reach out to this new casualised workforce. Meanwhile, politicians are only just waking up to the fact that the orthodoxy that both Conservatives and Labour have pushed for decades – that work always pays – is wrong. In modern Britain, someone can slog their guts out and still have to go to the food bank or rely on benefits to get by.

Against that backdrop, this week’s report into the gig economy by Frank Field is to be welcomed. The MP for Birkenhead has seen how his own constituency lost its industry and the stable jobs that went with it, and got back insecure and low-paid work. His intervention should shame the new business secretary, Greg Clark, into conducting his own full inquiry, but makes some sound recommendations – chief among them that gig companies should “guarantee minimum daily and weekly rates of pay”.

New laws do need to be made – but the old ones could also do with being tweaked and enforced properly. HMRC needs more cash and staff so that it can investigate whether employers are paying the minimum wage. With Hermes, the tax inspectors only got going after the Guardian’s investigation. In other cases, they have been prompted by tiny unions such as the admirably scrappy Independent Workers’ Union of Great Britain. While couriers are plainly not employees, it is false to claim that they are “independent contractors” – however convenient it may be for their companies to do so. Better to have a presumption in law that they are “workers” – and to grant them rights to statutory sick pay and redress against unfair dismissal.