




Trump labels Clinton 'the devil' and suggests election will be rigged




With each passing day, Donald Trump’s poll numbers continue to fall, and the specter of defeat in November looms larger. Perhaps in preparation for that outcome, the Republican presidential nominee claims that if he loses it won’t be due to his ineptitude. Instead, he says the electoral system is “rigged” against him. This argument is not only absolute nonsense, but threatens the stability and integrity of our society. 
Rigged elections have been a hot topic this election. Hordes of Bernie Sanders supporters claimed that the Democratic primaries were “rigged” against him. They cite the DNC email scandal, which showed some party staffers seeking to undermine Sanders, as evidence. 
To reinforce his spurious claims, Trump has said that the recent striking down of Republican-sponsored voter ID laws and other voting impediments that have proven to be purposefully discriminatory will result in rampant voter fraud.
“People are going to walk in there, they’re going to vote 10 times, maybe. Who knows? They’re going to vote 10 times,” said Trump to Fox News on Tuesday.
Not only is Trump spreading outrageous conspiracy theories, but he is arguing that the removal of discriminatory voting practices would bring about electoral instability and invalidate our democratic process. Never mind that these laws directly benefited the Republican party and rigged elections in their favor. 
Just last week, the US court of appeals for the fourth circuit invalidated North Carolina’s strict voter ID laws. The court stated that their elimination of same-day voter registration and other voting restrictions had “targeted African Americans with almost surgical precision”.
“When a legislature dominated by one party has dismantled barriers to African American access to the franchise, even if done to gain votes,” continued the court’s decision, “‘politics as usual’ does not allow a legislature dominated by the other party to re-erect those barriers.”
Despite this, Trump argues enfranchisement for African Americans and other minorities would constitute a “rigged” system that could invalidate our democracy. That is a deeply hypocritical position.
Republican leaders have remained silent throughout all of these outlandish statements. Both Senate majority leader Mitch McConnell and speaker of the House Paul Ryan have declined to comment, and RNC chairman Reince Priebus’ office redirected questions back to Trump’s campaign for additional clarification.
Yet Republican leaders may be incapable of sternly denouncing Trump’s accusations because they have heavily campaigned for new voting restrictions. Today’s Republican party has directly benefited from intentionally tipping the electoral scales in its favor. Its last Republican president was elected without winning the popular vote and under a cloud of documented voting improprieties, especially in Florida where the disenfranchisement of African Americans was rampant.
Trump’s possible path to victory grows narrower by the day. He trails Hillary Clinton in Utah – a state that has gone Republican in the last 12 presidential elections – and analysts speculate that he’ll need to sweep Florida, Ohio, Pennsylvania and North Carolina to win.
Roger Stone, a longtime Trump adviser, has even encouraged Trump to “constantly” discuss voter fraud, and has said that there will be “widespread civil disobedience” and a “bloodbath” if Clinton were to “steal” the election from Trump.
No one should be surprised that Trump and his surrogates are already projecting a narrative of “rigged” elections in three of those states. Trump projects himself to be a “winner” so when he loses the opposition must have cheated. Trump’s rhetoric will only grow and become increasingly irrational and dangerous as defeat becomes more likely.
Trump is a desperate candidate who is willing to say absolutely anything, regardless of how irresponsible it may be, and the Republican higher-ups are incapable of reining him in. They are also unwilling to denounce him because in many circumstances they are tacitly complicit with the lies, propaganda and rigged elections that Trump espouses.
America’s democracy has definitely been rigged to disenfranchise African Americans and other minorities, and these undemocratic policies have regularly been endorsed by Republican politicians. Trump’s latest claims are not only built upon lies, but they could encourage violence, anarchy and an erosion of democracy.
Trump wants to take us back to a more violent, undemocratic America because in today’s inclusive, equitable and enfranchising America he, and the rest of the Republican party, may become losers. He’s willing to dismantle our democracy in his quest to Make America Great Again. America cannot afford to let this happen.

