In an extraordinary admission of how deeply unpopular fracking is, Theresa May has announced a bribe in an increasingly desperate attempt to win people over. But opposition to fracking in the UK is so overwhelming that it simply won’t work.

A “Shale Wealth Fund” for local communities was first announced in 2014. It is still yet to be used: fracking hasn't happened in the UK in the last five years due to local communities saying no everywhere fracking companies propose to drill. Now the Government appears to be attempting to divide local communities by paying off individual households. This is the sort of manoeuvre that discredits politicians and undermines people's trust in Government.

The reality is that, for shale to be a serious energy source, we would need hundreds of new wells puncturing our landscape. There just is no social license for the industrialisation of our countryside, and the Government knows it.

Opposition to fracking already stretches right across the country. The hostility in leafy Balcome meant that oil and gas explorer Cuadrilla was blockaded at the gates of its acquired site, and later decided to withdraw. In Lancashire, the council listened to local people and rejected Cuadrilla's application. In Ryedale, the council has approved an application by Third Energy (majority owned by Barclays Bank) to frack, but Friends of the Earth is working with the local community to judicially review the decision.

Judicial review is the last protection for local communities to challenge unlawful decisions by government, but the Government is planning to make that recourse to justice in the courts prohibitively expensive by removing cost caps for environmental cases.

It’s no wonder that objections are so widespread. We already know that fracking is not compatible with tackling climate change. Earlier this year a Harvard study showed a 30 per cent spike in the methane emissions in the US directly correlating with the boom in fracking. Methane is 25 times more potent than carbon dioxide in causing climate change.

Gas from fracking would simply add to the more than 80 per cent of known fossil fuel reserves that cannot be burned if we are to avoid catastrophic climate change. This is about the future of an inhabitable planet, not just the impacts on local people and communities.

Because of the health and environmental risks of the practice, it is being banned or put on hold around the world, from New York State to France, Germany, the Netherlands, Scotland and Wales. Theresa May started her premiership by saying she would “do everything we can to give you more control over your lives. When we take the big calls, we’ll think not of the powerful, but you. We’ll listen not to the mighty but to you.” Many were hoping that would mean a shift in direction on fracking, away from “going all out” for shale gas and rigging the planning system in favour of fracking company interests instead of local communities. It now appears that hope was in vain.

The next big test will be whether the Government respects the decision of the people of Lancashire to reject fracking. The Government has “called in” the decision and will decide whether to overrule the vote of the local authority – in the name of its constituents – to reject Cuadrilla’s application to frack. Local residents and environmentalists wait on baited breath.

Climate change protests around the world







25 show all Climate change protests around the world















































1/25 People rally to promote climate protection in Rome, Italy

2/25 Hundreds of demonstrators gather in front of City Hall in Los Angeles, California EPA

3/25 People hold hands to form a human chain during a gathering called by ecologist organisations in Marseille, southern France, to protest against global warming a day ahead of the United Nations Conference on Climate Change (COP21) held in Paris

4/25 Demonstrators clash with French riot police during protests on Place de la Republique, ahead of the COP21 World Climate Change Conference 2015 in Paris, France

5/25 Demonstrators clash with French riot police during a protest on Place de la Republique ahead of the COP21 World Climate Change Conference 2015 in Paris, France

6/25 A group of people perform during a rally to promote climate protection in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil

7/25 A protester sits next to his sign that reads 'Monsanto the Devil Incorporated ' as he joined hundreds of demonstrators who gathered in front of City Hall in Los Angeles, California EPA

8/25 Environmentalists dance during a protest near the Place de la Republique after the cancellation of a planned climate march following shootings in the French capital, ahead of the World Climate Change Conference 2015 (COP21), in Paris, France Reuters

9/25 People protest next to characters dressed as wild animals during a march against climate change near the Monument to the Revolution, in Mexico City AP

10/25 Protesters carries a banner while they take part in a protest about climate change at New York City Hall steps in lower Manhattan, New York Reuters

11/25 People take part in a protest about climate change around New York City Hall at lower Manhattan, New York Reuters

12/25 People rally to promote climate protection in Piazza Castello, Turin, Italy

13/25 A woman holds a globe during a protest for the global climate day in Lugano, Switzerland

14/25 Yemenis hold banners as they participate in the Global March for Climate in the old city of Sanaía, Yemen

15/25 Protesters dressed as Santa Claus take part in a protest about climate change at New York City Hall steps in lower Manhattan, New York Reuters

16/25 People gather at the Legislative Palace in Montevideo, during the Global Climate March to demand action on climate change telling world leaders on the eve of a crunch UN summit that there is "no planet B". From Sydney to London, humid Rio to chilly New York, at least 683,000 hit the streets in 2,300 events across 175 countries at the weekend, co-organiser and campaign group Avaaz said, calling it the largest number of people to protest over climate change all at once Getty Images

17/25 A protester dressed as a panda bear marches with others holding banners reading 'stop climate change' through the streets of central Madrid during the Global Climate March

18/25 Demonstrators participate in the Global March for Climate in Athens, Greece

19/25 A man wearing a Bernie Sanders mask leads hundreds of demonstrators who marched near City Hall in Los Angeles, California EPA

20/25 Patricia Hauser joined hundreds of demonstrators who gathered in front of City Hall in Los Angeles, California

21/25 A woman holds a poster of a sick Earth as she joined hundreds of demonstrators who gathered in front of City Hall in Los Angeles, California EPA

22/25 Hundreds of demonstrators march around City Hall in Los Angeles, California EPA

23/25 A demonstrator holds cut-out of US Democratic Presidential candidate Bernie Sanders as she joined hundreds of demonstrators who gathered in front of City Hall in Los Angeles, California EPA

24/25 George Patten holds a sign that reads 'No Fracking Ever!' as he joined hundreds of demonstrators who gathered in front of City Hall in Los Angeles, California EPA

25/25 Gabrielle Sosa wears 'Rising Sea Levels' sign as she joined hundreds of demonstrators who gathered in front of City Hall in Los Angeles, California EPA

Meanwhile, the Government has all but banned onshore wind even though (contrary to much media coverage) it is much more popular than fracking, is welcomed by local people when it is located in the right place, and is the cheapest form of renewable energy production.

It’s time for Theresa May to listen to the people and accept that fracking isn’t going to happen in the UK. But, instead of focusing on rebuilding our renewable energy and energy efficiency industries after support was slashed by her predecessor, she is handing out bribes. Not a good start from the new Prime Minister.

Liz Hutchins is a senior campaigner at Friends of the Earth