
This weekend former prime minister Tony Abbott has been explaining to European conservatives why they should heed Australia’s success in controlling its borders. Speaking to the Alliance of European Conservatives and Reformists in Prague, he characterised the Europe’s current migration crisis as having the look of a “peaceful invasion” that could over time could become “an existential challenge”.
His words would have found a receptive audience: retiring UK Independence Party leader Nigel Farage has approved of Australia’s migration policy as a model and others across Europe have been reported as drawing inspiration from Australia.
Tony Abbott’s message to European leaders was clear: if only they were as tough as he had been, they too could “stop the boats”.




Analysis: why Tony Abbott's plan for Europe's refugee crisis cannot work




Unfortunately, this is the wrong message to take from the Australian experience. Instead, here are the three lessons Europeans should take.
Costs too much
The reality is that most countries won’t be able to use Australia’s techniques to stop people movements due to the number of arrivals and the prohibitive expense involved.
It is true that Australia has had success in stopping the boats through disrupting people smugglers’ business model. This has involved turning back boats to Indonesia, offshore processing and the use of detention centres in Nauru and Papua New Guinea based on a policy that boat arrivals will never be resettled in Australia. Australia has shown that government can influence the number of arrivals through policy settings.
However, Australia’s success is not replicable in most other countries. It can only be attempted by the richest of countries which have low refugee numbers.
Per capita, the financial cost is enormous. This week’s Australian National Audit Office report details a cost of $573,111 per person per year for holding on Manus Island and Nauru. Australia spends more than $1bn per year on offshore processing for fewer than 2,000 people. This is not a model the EU can emulate with migration flows of more than 200,000 in January to May this year alone.
It is also worth mentioning the non-fiscal costs related to this policy. Australia’s international relationships have been effected, particularly with Nauru and Papua New Guinea where Australia is accused of neo-colonialism and, crucially, with rising power Indonesia where issues around migration have created friction in one of Australia’s most important relationships.
The detention of refugees has a demonstrably high cost for those in detention. The Australian Human Rights Commission’s National Inquiry into Children in Immigration Detention is unequivocal on the negative impact of prolonged detention on detainees’ mental and physical health.
The bottom line is that you can’t stop people movements of the scale occurring in Europe by adopting Australia’s border policies.
Migration can work
The second lesson to be taken from Australia is more positive: it is that mass migration can really work.
The Australian experience shows the economic and cultural benefits of mass migration. From a small white settler society at the end of the second world war, Australia has been transformed to a vibrant multicultural nation. Statistics show that 28% of the population was born overseas – with at least another 20% the child of an overseas-born parent.
This is a dramatic change and results have been broadly positive. For example, Australia is one of only three countries in the world where children of migrants score better at school than children of non-migrants.
Australia has reaped the economic benefits of migration. Tracing Australia’s history, George Megalogenis links periods of economic growth to times when Australia was open to migration. The current prime minister, Malcolm Turnbull, drew this lesson: “openness and multiculturalism based on mutual respect is what has defined most of the most successful societies in the world”.
When Europeans worry about the impossibility of integration of those with different cultural or religious backgrounds, Australia is a salutary case study of what is possible.
It’s under control
The final lesson to be drawn from Australia is that the second lesson is tied to the first: to achieve societal acceptance of mass migration, the public has to be convinced that the process is under control.




The claim that locking asylum seekers up in Nauru and PNG saves lives is bogus | Philippe Legrain




This is the fascinating lesson from John Howard’s prime ministership. The prime minister who took such a hard line on border security was also the one who oversaw significant increases in overall migration; in 2007 the number of permanent migrants hit 191,000: the largest cohort since the second world war.
He understood this truth: that to build acceptance of mass migration, governments have to convince the public that the process is under control.
The core aim of Australia’s migration program is that it is orderly. South Sudanese who wait patiently in refugee camps can be resettled through a humanitarian program. The announcement of 12,000 places for carefully checked and screened Syrian refugees was welcomed. By contrast, news reports of people arriving “uninvited” by boat taps into the national neurosis about being overrun by swarms from the north.
At a time when a huge number of people are on the move and where very few countries accept long-term resettlement, we need to think about what we can do to help prepare our populations to understand and respond.
In this context it’s vital to draw the right lessons from Australia’s experience.
Melissa Conley Tyler is the national executive director of the Australian Institute of International Affairs. 

