
Populism is rampant. Donald Trump is a contender for the US presidency. Marine Le Pen fancies her chances in France. Across Europe and beyond there is a powerful sense of mainstream politics reaching a state of abject failure. These are volatile, dangerous times: what with all that shouting about greedy, cosseted elites, people close to the summit of power and influence surely ought to be very wary of playing to type.




EU staff petition attacks Barroso over Goldman Sachs job




But just look. This week the petition protesting at José Manuel Barroso, a former president of the European commission, taking a new job as a nonexecutive chairman and adviser to Goldman Sachs International surpassed 75,000 signatures. It is the work of employees of the EU, whose horror at Barroso’s move is captured in its preamble, and reference to the “European project’s deteriorating image among our families, friends and neighbours as well as the many citizens we encounter all over Europe”. They are aiming at 150,000 signatories, and want the appointment to be referred to the European court of justice, which could theoretically take away Barroso’s €100,000-a-year pension.
How much he’ll be paid is unclear. But in a role partly built around advice about the consequences of Brexit, Barroso will be working for the bank that played a key role in the US subprime crisis, and helped Greece mask its fatal debt problems. The whole spectacle suggests a man gleefully posing for his own caricature, and it is hardly unique: indeed, highlighting a revolving door that never stops turning, his predecessor at Goldman Sachs International was Ireland’s former EU commissioner Peter Sutherland.
Between 2009 and 2010 alone, six out of 13 departing EU commissioners moved into new corporate or lobbying roles. The details extend into the distance, but a piquant flavour is conveyed by a forensic report compiled by a snappily named campaign group called Alter-EU, AKA the Alliance for Lobbying Transparency and Ethics Regulation. One Günter Verheugen, it reports, was a German member of the European commission between 1999 and 2010, and served as commissioner for enterprise and industry, and as one of Barroso’s vice-presidents.
And after that? Take a deep breath. Circa 2011 the same man – a former member of Germany’s centre-left Social Democrats – was “a senior adviser at the Royal Bank of Scotland, a European affairs adviser for the National Association of German Co-operative Banks, a member of lobbying consultancy Fleishman-Hillard’s international advisory board and an adviser at the Turkish Union of Chambers and Commodity Exchanges”. He also put in the hours for BP, Coca-Cola and Barclays Capital, as well as grafting at the European Experience Company, a consultancy firm he had co-founded with his former head of cabinet. Among other goodies, it offers its clients “the best strategy for your success in dealing with European institutions”.
Such is the life of people defined by their time at the very top of the EU: an organisation, to quote the academic and writer Robert Tombs, that is “unpopular, unaccountable, secretive, often corrupt, and economically failing – from which our decision to depart apparently causes people to weep in the streets”.
That said, any patriotic Brexiteers should hardly gloat. Britain, after all, has long been the market leader when it comes to ex-politicians and civil servants taking handsomely paid roles related directly to their former jobs, and this trailblazing work goes on.




 

The Daily Mirror found that 25 former coalition ministers in had taken paid roles in sectors they once oversaw




 

It is worth looking at the current issue of Private Eye, and a six–page special headlined Public Servants, Private Paydays. Inevitably, there are mentions of the New Labour-era politicians who subsequently took paid gigs in fields closely related to some of their former ministerial jobs: David Blunkett, Alan Milburn, John Hutton, John Reid and Patricia Hewitt. Inevitably, there is a big role for Tony Blair and his tangle of “business interests” that increasingly defies explanation.
As the Eye report says, for two years former ministers and civil servants must not lobby government, and are theoretically accountable to Acoba, the Advisory Committee on Business Appointments. But even so, since 2010 “the committee has not advised that a single proposed appointment, out of more than 750, should not be made”. The questionable roles it has approved are part of a story whose scope goes much wider than politicians: it is sobering to be reminded, for example, that the last three heads of MI6 have all taken paid roles with oil conglomerates. While we’re here, note also that though the former Bank of England governor Mervyn King once railed against “incompetent and greedy” financiers, he is now a senior adviser to the US banking giant Citigroup.
Watch closely as the alumni of the governments headed by David Cameron exit full-time politics. Already, in fact, an odorous cloud has started to form. Earlier this year a Daily Mirror investigation found that 25 former ministers in the coalition government had taken paid roles in sectors they once oversaw. The list was by no means exclusively Tory: the one-time Lib Dem energy minister Ed Davey, for example, is now an adviser to MHP Communications, the lobbying firm that does the bidding of EDF – the French energy giant to whom Davey awarded the controversial contract for the Hinkley Point C power station.
Another interesting case study is Rupert Harrison, a former adviser to George Osborne, who worked closely on the changes to pensions that now allow people to cash in their savings rather than buy an annuity. Somewhat conveniently, he’s now managing director of BlackRock, an asset management company for which he will work as “chief macro-strategist”, partly focused on their “retirement proposition”.
Few people may pay close attention to all these machinations, but they are well aware of the stench they give off, and a regular stream of stories that smell much the same. This week’s headlines have been smattered with them: David Cameron’s decision to presage his exit from Downing Street by awarding some his advisers pay rises of up to 24%; the news that at this year’s Conservative conference businesses can pay £3,150 a head to have lunch with the prime minister, followed by a “round table” session with ministers from the relevant field.
The brazenness of the offer is of a piece with all those shameless leaps from government to business: on this evidence, even as the reputation of politics and politicians continues to plunge, the people involved simply do not care.
Does anyone think to join the dots between these stories and, say, the fact that 58% of people in households earning less than £20,000 a year voted for Brexit? Here is the reason why some people saw Nigel Farage as a principled battler against self-serving plutocrats. In the case of Jeremy Corbyn, his personal contrast with all these machinations has formed the stuff of political sainthood. Meanwhile, those poor souls who try to restore the reputation of the political mainstream flounder: Owen Smith’s time working for Pfizer may be innocent proof of what he sees as a useful understanding of “how big companies operate” – but in this context it is toxic.
In Britain and Europe, we will know when politics has started to wake up to all this. Former ministers will take modest jobs in the voluntary sector or academia; toothless regulations will be sharpened to the point that sliding from a ministerial portfolio to a related area of business becomes impossible; aspiring politicians will vow to leave the revolving door well alone. But in the meantime, these disgraces go on. History tells us what tends to happen when moneyed cliques carry on stuffing their pockets while the public grows restive. At the risk of howling understatement, it rarely ends well.

