
Anthony Weiner’s latest sexting scandal could hardly be worse if it were scripted to maximally embarrass Huma Abedin and her employer, the Clinton campaign. And on Monday, following a New York Post report that included a cringe-worthy photo of Weiner in bed beside his and Abedin’s young son, Abedin announced that she and her husband would be separating.
No sooner did the news of her decision break on Monday than the predictable happened: Donald Trump started politicizing it for personal gain. 




Did Anthony Weiner want to get caught sexting? | Jamieson Webster




After condescendingly opining about how Abedin “will be far better off” without her husband, Trump proceeded to extend his political smearing of Abedin to her boss in a statement to the New York Times. “I only worry for the country in that Hillary Clinton was careless and negligent in allowing Weiner to have such close proximity to highly classified information,” he wrote in a statment. “Who knows what he learned and who he told? It’s just another example of Hillary Clinton’s bad judgment.”
Never mind that a reaction from Trump should be irrelevant here – that none of this should reflect on the Clinton campaign at all. This is not a story about the 2016 presidential race. But it will be made into one.
We knew this would happen, and specifically, that Trump would lead the way to politicizing the failings of a campaign staffer’s husband, because it’s something he’s done before. Exactly a year ago, he suggested that Abedin had leaked sensitive state department information to Weiner, whom he referred to as a “perv”, a “sleazebag” and generally a “bad guy” simply because the pair was married. Speaking at an event in suburban Boston last year, Trump suggested there’s a less than “5% chance that’s she’s not telling Anthony Weiner now of a public relations firm what the hell is coming across” her desk, as the Guardian reported at the time.
But we also knew this would happen, because it’s not just Trump who’s guilty of this narrative spin, as Rush Limbaugh made clear on Monday with a particularly odious line conflating Abedin’s personal life with her political one: “Presumably she’s going to be Hillary’s chief of staff. But she has not been chief of her husband’s staff,” he said.
There’s a long history and rich culture of blaming women in American politics for their husbands’ bad behavior. And nobody is a better poster woman for that particular sexist affliction than Abedin’s boss, whose personal life has been the target of more public vitriol than perhaps any other political figure in history. This despite the fact that, like Abedin, Clinton had engaged in zero sexual misconduct herself.
Even now, in the supposedly enlightened year of 2016, when Trump is attacked for being bad on women, his defenders often respond by blaming Clinton for her husband’s actions. Trump surrogate Heidi Harris did this recently on MSNBC’s AM Joy. Asked about Trump’s treatment of women, Harris responded with an attack on Clinton: “What I think hilarious is Hillary Clinton is no example for any woman. This is a woman who stood next to a guy for decades who has embarrassed her, humiliated her, cheated on her, chased every skirt he could possibly chase,” Harris said, adding, “She’s no example for anyone’s daughter.” 
Bill Clinton’s bad behavior is not and never was his wife’s fault, but she will continue to be blamed as long as sexism is alive in America. 
Similarly, Abedin would have been attacked for her husband’s behavior no matter what she did.
After the news of Abedin’s decision to leave her marriage broke, many, including a senior New York Times reporter on the Clinton beat, were already making comparisons between Abedin and Steve Bannon, the recently appointed chief executive officer of the Trump campaign who’s been accused of domestic violence. “The problem for Clinton team – after Democrats repeatedly pointed to Bannon personal past, going to be hard to argue Weiner is off limits,” tweeted the reporter.
In fact, it’s infinitely easier to argue that Abedin’s husband’s sexual behavior should be off limits. For one thing, he did nothing illegal. For another, Anthony Weiner is not the CEO of Clinton’s campaign; he has no role in it whatsoever.
Whatever your feelings about his failure to redeem himself even having been given not just a second chance, but a third, this is a heartbreaking result for Abedin and her young son, who opened up their personal life once again this past year in the hope that a documentary about their lives post-scandal would make personal redemption possible for the father of their family.
Blame Weiner for all this, mock him, or feel sorry for him, but don’t blame Huma Abedin. She did nothing wrong, and any attempts to blame her here and insinuate Hillary Clinton into the equation are worse than purely political: they are blatantly sexist.
A man who cheats on his wife does not reflect a shortcoming in his spouse – or in the woman who would hire her. If anything, the fact that these women have been able to withstand so much personal hardship in the face of unyielding political attacks is a testament to their character. We should respect them more for what they’ve been able to endure despite the sexually dysfunctional men in their lives, and despite whether they ultimately chose to stay with their husband, or not.

