We like to imagine some kinds of progress are irreversible and congratulate ourselves on how far we have come. Britain was once the nation of Enoch Powell and The Black and White Minstrel Show; now it is the country that elected a Muslim mayor of London and cheered as Nadiya Hussain won the Great British Bake Off. So keen are we to embrace each other that mixed-race people are the fastest-growing ethnic group. If prejudice and discrimination have not quite vanished, they are en route to their inevitable elimination.

Not so, says a report from the Equality and Human Rights Commission. David Isaac, the watchdog’s chair, highlighted the long-term, systemic racial inequality that hinders people across education, work, health and housing; he also warned that social divisions are likely to widen and racial tensions to grow unless these entrenched unfairnesses are tackled. Life has already worsened in the last five years for many ethnic minority groups, particularly young black people. Not only is poverty twice as likely among ethnic minorities as it is for white people, but black men and their families have seen the largest regressions in pay and income. The number of long-term unemployed young people from ethnic minority communities rose by 49% between 2010 and 2015, while there was a 2% decrease among young white people.

Some will be startled by the stark findings, just as they were taken aback when Ms Hussain said recently that she had come to expect racial abuse, a statement unlikely to have surprised many Muslims. Others will reject them, despite abundant data, or stress Britain’s comparative advantages – no ban on burkinis here – as though another country’s failings render ours irrelevant. But the real progress in many areas has been matched by stasis or regression in others. Solving these problems will, the EHRC argues, require a comprehensive equality strategy.

Theresa May’s first statement as prime minister struck the right notes on equality issues, citing the facts that black people are treated more harshly by the criminal justice system than white peers, that women earn less than men, and that white working-class boys are least likely to go to university. Yet as Mr Isaac noted, government efforts to tackle racial inequality have so far been piecemeal and stuttering; more “one-nation platitudes” than policies. The same could be said of its equalities agenda in general. Since 2010, the EHRC’s £62m budget has been slashed by two thirds – and its core funding of just £17.1m has been frozen for several years, declining in real terms. Cuts to legal aid and fee increases have sparked a 91% fall in sex discrimination cases at tribunals and a fall in faith, race and general discrimination cases of about 60%. Disability benefits have been slashed. While Mrs May has tackled issues such as trafficking, she has shown little interest in addressing structural problems. As home secretary she scrapped a “ridiculous” legal requirement requiring public bodies to try to reduce socio-economic inequalities.

Without sustained and coordinated effort, prejudice and unfairness will persist and even grow. Mr Isaac highlighted the surge in racist incidents around the EU referendum – a 42% increase in reports said by police to be probably the worst on record. Polish children received cards calling them vermin; black and Asian Britons were told to go back “where they came from”. Of course, not everyone who voted for Brexit was racist. But some took the vote as a licence for bigoted behaviour, encouraged by the ugly rhetoric of some leave campaigners.

Equality does not fall from the skies; it does not thrive unfed. We have to choose it. Sometimes those decisions are made at the grassroots, such as in the Grunwick strike, 40 years ago this weekend, when a largely Asian and female workforce mobilised and trade unionists backed them. Sometimes they are taken by government. Only hard and persistent work on both fronts can protect the advances that Britain has made and effect those still needed.