
In the wake of the spectacular Democratic convention it seems unreasonable even to hint at the possibility that Donald Trump might win. Such speeches! Such enthusiasm! Such ideals! Such drama and emotion! Such a pseudo-event!
But a woman nominee – such a moment. And one to make Trumpland look ridiculous. Even that old lizard Bill Clinton was poignant in his way.
 But Bill Clinton is the author of the North American Free Trade Agreement (Nafta) and the president who ended Glass–Steagall, the 1933 act that prohibited banks from engaging in the investment business. 
Hillary Clinton is going to the fight with Trump on a promise to at least look again at Nafta and reintroduce an equivalent to Glass–Steagall to keep the banks in line. Thanks to Bernie Sanders, that’s in the platform. So is a resolution to break up the banks that Congress bailed out – and didn’t punish for their sins.




Hillary Clinton's speech was a powerful, primal first – and it blew me away | Xeni Jardin




Hillary is also now committed to scuttling the Trans Pacific Partnership, which her new pal President Obama badly wants because it’s a big part of his geopolitics. Hillary Clinton has a platform that really isn’t hers. The Democrats are proceeding as one party, but in truth there are now two – one subscribes to neoliberalism and the other foreshadows its demise – and she has to represent both of them. Philadelphia was a beautiful and moving thing, and Democrats can only hope that all those tears of joy and love were enough to wash away the contradictions.
 This might be unfair. Whether she was driven there by Bernie Sanders or has chosen to renew her old Methodist vows to the poor and meek, Clinton is running on a progressive ticket now, and she might decide to make that the colour of her presidency. She promises to invest heavily in the cities to lift people out of poverty; to invest in infrastructure, create jobs, revive manufacturing and raise the minimum wage. The platform promises comprehensive immigration reform, an end to student debt, paid family leave and much else. It is very likely what Sanders said it was – the most progressive platform in the party’s history.
 Listening to her now, you might think that after years as a member of the supply-side economics church, Hillary Clinton’s joined the revived and steadily expanding demand-side one. Could she in eight years reverse the engines of inequality and corruption, bridge the divides and enliven the democracy? Could she desegregate the cities? 
Could she get her country leading the world by example to save the planet from global warming? Could she do something about the lobbyists, the power of money in Washington that is destroying American democracy from within? Take on Wall Street? Make the effort on behalf of public decency and ordinary justice that was not made after the financial collapse? Could she get the public interest represented in Washington again? 
Could she do something about guns? In Chicago on the Memorial Day weekend, sixty-nine people were shot. Six died. As of 1 August, 401 people had been murdered in that one city in 2016, 90% of them with guns.
 Are any of these things open to remedy? Probably not: the problems run too deep, but the effort would be uplifting and a more productive way to prove her country is exceptional than anything she might have in mind for bloodying foreign noses.
 Could she get American troops out of Afghanistan, the fifteen-year war she mentioned not once in her acceptance speech in Philadelphia? That might be the most unlikely of all.
 Nothing she says, old or new, will much impress voters who don’t trust the Clintons, or think they reek of entitlement, lies and money. The hole she’s punched in the glass ceiling won’t impress them. But the prospect of Hillary and Bill back in the White House might lift their loathing into realms of mania. It will feel like the ultimate corruption, the ultimate insult, the ultimate proof that the system stinks.
You don’t have to share this point of view to understand it. At the very least, her supporters could ask themselves what they would be making of the $153m in speaking fees or the $1.8m she collected from speeches to the banks, if they were pinned to Donald Trump – or to Mitt Romney or John McCain. Ditto the emails. The reasonable fear is that Hillary Clinton will be tempted to pacify the haters by the military expression of exceptionalism.
 Clinton just has to win. If she loses, not only does the world get Donald Trump (and the US Supreme Court his appointments): the Democrats will have to live forever with their decision to make their nominee the most qualified presidential candidate in history, but also the person most disliked by the American public and possibly the only one that Trump could beat.




This may shock you: Hillary Clinton is fundamentally honest | Jill Abramson




 We can hope that from her example great numbers of American women will draw inspiration, and believe that both wisdom and opportunity will deepen with their influence on public life. It should have been a moment of pure celebration, seeing Elizabeth Warren on the hustings with Clinton early in June. But you could feel the hackles rising on every neck in every bar in every swing state across the country. Warren mocking Trump, trading insults – and the guys in the bar think she’s mocking them and make a little resolution and write it inside their hats – “Vote this time.” The triumph of one identity is the violation of another.
 Trump says, Hand your fear over to me. Hand your loathing over too. I will deal with your enemies as I have dealt with mine. I will give you back your freedom, and your country. Your old lives will be yours to live again. I will halt the terminal decline. American exceptionalism, in which you all hold shares, will be underwritten by an exceptional American.
 The Democrats scoff at Trump for wanting to take the country back to the past. But for many of the people whose votes will count in November, Trump’s imaginary past is a more concrete thing to contemplate than the Democrats’ imaginary present. Trump’s also contains more hope, and it serves as a more believable American tomorrow. If, as seems likely, Clinton wins, it will not be out of love, or even hope, but rather out of fear. She can win by simply letting her deplorable opponent lose.








  

Quarterly Essay Enemy Within by Don Watson Photograph: Quarterly Essay


On the other hand, she’s nothing if not adaptable, and she could yet see in these very favourable circumstances (the Republicans falling apart, negligible interest rates, a public appetite for radical reform) the chance to lead the nation’s social and economic regeneration through, for a start, massive investment in education, renewable energy and infrastructure, and an equally massive legislative attack on inequality and political corruption. 
Call it a New Great Awakening or a New New Deal; it would owe something to both, and to Bernie Sanders as well, but also to her need to be more than the first woman president. Reawakening the old grassroots reformer deep inside could not only heap manifold blessings on the nation and consolidate a liberal Democratic ascendancy; it is surely also the best antidote to the dark forces now feeding on the country’s malaise.
This is an edited extract from Don Watson’s Quarterly Essay 63, Enemy Within: American Politics in the Time of Trump, quarterlyessay.com, available now

