
It has not been the brightest of summers for School. To any non-Etonians reading it should perhaps be pointed out that Etonians use the word School specifically not generically. It refers to a singular institution. School is Eton. It does not include places like Harrow, Rugby, or, God forbid, St Paul’s Day School. Therefore, should an Old Etonian find time in his busy schedule to ask you if you went to School the correct response is “No”. Otherwise, he will follow up with questions about which house you might have been in (TSBC or HSBC?); what type of bob you were (wet, dry or slack?); and whatever happened to Darius Guppy? And if you try to answer these without having the foggiest what you are talking about the pair of you will be in for a confusing half-hour.




Why I take my hat off to Putin’s Eton 11 | David Turner




Glad that’s sorted. As most will recall, the summer opened with an uneventful 4 June (School’s gala day), a drawn test between England and Sri Lanka at Lord’s, and a referendum called by one Old Etonian being hijacked by another Old Etonian and ending up with a result that neither Old Etonian wanted. A vote that had the further unfortunate consequence of School, within the space of a week, somehow contriving to lose two prime ministers. A scale of carelessness illustrated by the fact that in nearly three centuries of striving, Winchester and St Paul’s Day School have contributed a solitary prime minister apiece. School blew two in seven days.
Nor was that all. Once again it was open season on the old alma mater. The knockers knocked. The carpers carped. The opinion formed by the opinion formers was that Eton was finished. It had had its day. Cruel and vicious was the calumny visited upon Cameron Mi and Johnson KS. Talk about kicking Old Etonians (OE) when they are down.








  

‘The older generation are still in place and – see the Putin visit – the younger generation are going through their paces.’ Photograph: Mikhail Klimentyev/Tass


As is customary when faced with such a predicament my contemporaries kept their heads down. From Java to Jura (Js are in fashion this year – next year it will be K as holidaying Old Etonians move serenely through the alphabet) they spent their summers away from the public eye. Only to return refreshed, emboldened and ready to “go again”. Rory Stewart, Jesse Norman, young Rees-Mogg, the brothers Johnson are all still in place. The next Tory leader, and probable next prime minister, is likely as not to be another OE. The vilified Boris remains the bookies’ favourite.
The older generation are still in place and – see the Putin visit – the younger generation are going through their paces. A photo opportunity which, I have to say, struck me as a spoof but I am of a generation fated never to understand the Book of Face. If someone status updates you to inform you of their child’s A-level results does that mean their account has been hacked? And what of all those pictures of foreign travel?
Certainly, in my day, similar results were achieved with less effort and more elan. Perry Ogden managing to produce a magazine called Lipstick which included interviews with Joe Strummer, Diana Rigg, David Bailey, Diana Vreeland and Andy Warhol, from a phone box in the high street armed only with a bag of loose change.
This takes some chutzpah. And it is that talent that one must be most wary of when it comes to Etonians. Growing up among, and competing against, the supremely self-confident teaches you, at the very least, to be able to feign supreme confidence.




I think I preferred Eton when it was still doomed | David Mitchell




If you are told regularly enough that you are at a school for excellence then you are likely to leave believing you can achieve anything. Although also, equal and oppositely, that you have never truly succeeded at anything. 
All that artifice, so much of it fake. Etonians are trained to be consummate confidence artists before being sent out to perpetuate the big con that is the School. Like all confidence tricks it depends on the gullibility of the mark for its continued success. And, boy, are we a nation of willing marks? Eton this, Eton that, here’s another picture of an OE twat.
What should be an anachronism is forever in the news … which if you are peddling a brand is precisely where you want to be. The more the opinion formers form opinions about Eton, the more they consign themselves to having to form further opinions about Eton. The School may have had a duff couple of months but things look set fair for the next few decades. The comeback is already under way.

