
As I made eye contact with the police officer and saw the flashing lights behind me, I made peace with God, for I feared that was the day my life would end, simply because I was black.
I watched him exit his car with a smug smile on his face. “Ma’am, do you know why I pulled you over today?” he asked.
“Yes, because you saw the semi-truck push me into the orange traffic cones,” I replied.




Facing my fear: my insomnia almost drove me crazy. Then I got help | Dutch Godshalk




The cop did not appreciate my tone, and he grew defiant: “No, because you were speeding in a construction zone,” he said. When I gave him my license and registration, his hands scratched mine during the interaction. It was not enough to draw blood, but enough to say, “know your place”.
Everyone drives over the speed limit in Texas. But not everyone is black, living with the perpetual fear that, in an encounter with police, the rights granted to me by the constitution would be null and void. That encountering my existence in a society that dehumanizes my body, the police would become the jury and the executioner. 
As what seems like an unending series of black bodies killed at the hands of police officers grinds on, it’s become ever clearer that my body can be subject to state-sanctioned violence at any time, no matter how I dress, speak or comply with the requests of police officers. I feel as if it is not my own. 
I saw the officer’s hands playing with the gun on his holster. He could end my life, and there would be no recorded evidence to prove my innocence. He would describe me as a liar, not respectful to authority, defiant, and write my death off as self-defense. 
I thought about Sandra Bland and wondered if she had made peace with God as she was driving away from her alma mater in Houston. I thought about Diamond Reynolds praying for her boyfriend, Philando Castile, as he bled out next to her while their daughter watched in the backseat. I thought about the countless black people who were tied to pickup trunks by ol’ southern boys during Jim Crow and driven to death until the asphalt was drenched in their blood.
The thought of driving off crossed my mind, but I didn’t want to give the cop any justification for violence. 
He returned a second time to my car, speeding ticket in hand. He lowered his voice and said, “You should be grateful I didn’t charge you more on this ticket” before taking one last look at me as I sat in the driver’s seat of my car. His eyes wandered up and down my body, and feelings of anger ignited within me as his eyes landed on my chest. Then he drawled, “Drive safely, ma’am,” and drove off.
I waited until his car disappeared before I began to cry. I cried for every person who met their Creator on those back country roads. I cried for every black woman whose body has been fetishized by white men without her consent. I cried because, if I died, I would not be granted justice.




Tell us about a time you faced your fear




Sandra Bland did not get justice. Alexia Christian did not get justice. Mya Hall did not get justice. Natasha McKenna did not get justice. The history of cops is a legacy of inflicting state-sanctioned violence on black bodies.
While driving back home, Assata Shakur’s quote came into my head: “I am about life. I’m gonna live as hard as I can and as full as I can until I die. And I’m not letting these parasites, these oppressors, these greedy racist swine make me kill my children in my mind, before they are even born.”
With that in mind, I drive to work everyday, combating the images and videos I’ve seen of black bodies like mine murdered by state-sanctioned violence. I start my car in spite of those who wish for my demise. I drive because it is my right to enjoy the fruitfulness and joy of life. I drive because I am entitled to feel the wind in my afro, to sing along with the music on the radio, and to live. My life matters. Black lives matter. 

