
Every few years Tory leaders have a nostalgic dream. It might be of a rerun of the British empire or a return to conscription or just Listen with Mother. But now Theresa May is hearing the old refrain, “Bring back the grammars.” The dream could become nightmare, unless she asks herself a simple question. Why did Margaret Thatcher never, in over a decade, rescind Labour’s 1965 edict introducing comprehensive education? Why did she not bring back selection at 11 years old?




Grammar schools don’t help social mobility – we need to start earlier | Melissa Benn




The answer is that Thatcher was wary of political suicide – at least until the poll tax. When she became education secretary in 1970, she found a poll in her Finchley constituency running at 80% against a return to selection. Plenty of Tories loved grammars, as most had been to them. But since 1944, admission had been by a supposedly objective “intelligence” test, not an academic exam. For the first time, middle-class children were being excluded from their ancestral schools in favour of at least a few “bright” working-class ones.
Thatcher’s shadow education predecessor, Edward Boyle, had been roasted at meeting after meeting by furious Tories whose children had “failed” the 11-plus and found themselves dumped in secondary moderns. Boyle struggled to promise no return to the 11-plus, but it wrecked his career. He was one of Thatcher’s few political friends.
The argument was and still is surrounded by mendacious noise. Under selection there is no such thing as parental choice, any more than there could be “a grammar school for all”. But from the 1970s onwards, the politics of state education, at least in the big cities, reflected the striving of some middle-class parents to “get our schools back”.
This led ministers of both parties to seek various centrist dodges, from assisted places and city technology colleges to specialist schools, academies and free schools – all as a means of separating so-called good schools from “sink” ones. Each was code for academic and/or social segregation. It was often astronomically expensive. In 2006 Bexley’s new academy was reported to have cost £50m. Michael Gove in 2014 had to raid the school “special needs” budget of £400m for his ailing free schools.








  

Margaret Thatcher in 1982: ‘When she became education secretary in 1970, she found a poll in her Finchley constituency running at 80% against a return to selective education.’ Photograph: Bride Lane Library/Popperfoto/Getty Images


Meanwhile entry to these “Whitehall” schools and the 163 remaining grammars (which Thatcher did save) drifted from the theoretical purity of the old 11-plus. Entry tests were made “crammable”, boosting parental involvement and seeing a cottage industry in tutoring in selective counties such as Kent. The money was worth it. Middle-class parents in Kent now either get into a local grammar or flee to the private sector. Today’s grammar schools are “fee-paying” by a different name.
As for the idea that “just a few” grammar schools would not harm the system, the chief inspector, Michael Wilshaw, could not be more dismissive. He said last week that setting and streaming were one thing, but returning to institutional segregation at 11, “where we only expect some kids to do well”, would be disastrous and retrograde. Every grammar school “means three secondary moderns, and no one is queueing to go to them”. As a former head of a London comprehensive, he would also have been “absolutely furious” to find the best 20% of pupils creamed off.
Two decades of that favourite ministerial bloodsport, tearing up school structures, has failed to deliver. Alice Sullivan of London’s Institute of Education declares: “There is no robust evidence that any particular structure … is beneficial for improving the performance of poor pupils.” Academies do not outperform local authority schools. Some do, some don’t. What happens in the classroom is what matters, not what happens in governors’ meetings.
The argument over selection nowadays applies almost exclusively to urban schools, since out-of-town comprehensives are barely controversial. There is usually just one community secondary. But in cities the debate has bite. This is because most parents naturally want their children to go to school with other children (and parents) like themselves. It is a concern well satirised in Tamsin Oglesby’s play, Future Conditional, last year at the Old Vic.
While such concern is understandable, there is no evidence that a comprehensive system delivers worse results overall – and clear evidence that, for poor children, selective systems are worse. The reality is that the top end of British secondary education is not at all bad. It is the bottom that is dire.




Ofsted chief warns May over 'retrograde step' of grammar schools




Nor is this a function of the curse of the debate, immigration. The evidence suggests that high-achieving migrants have led the recovery in London’s schools in recent years. The only coherent answer is to concentrate not on structure but resources. It is teaching, equipment and, above all, leadership that make a difference to a school.
The argument about selection is more about social policy than education. Schools financed by the state should be social integrators, not dividers. Grammars are dividers. Gove may have deserved praise for caring about standards, but his ideological obsession with selective free schools and dodgy academies was a disaster.
As for faith schools, seeking to replicate in England the religious divisions of Northern Ireland, with Muslims and Christians instead of Catholics and Protestants, must be reckless. These days, faith-based education should be social anathema. And as for currying favour with the Tory right, merely chipping off a few secondary schools and turning them into de facto adjuncts of the private sector cannot make educational or financial sense.
The answer must remain with local control – if not of schools then at least of their intake. Intake is all, because it is the chief determinant of performance.
Theresa May is playing with fire. When last year George Osborne attempted to nationalise every school in the land, it was Tory local councils that rose in fury and stopped him. To whom did he think their schools belonged? In an open society, schools are the melting pots of community tension. Their task should be to mitigate local division, not promote it. In the last century, collective secondary education in Britain was a true social advance, a revolution on a par with the Victorians’ education for all. Going backwards should be unthinkable.
The prime minister should let this dream pass. Perhaps she should rehearse a more honest slogan than “Bring back the grammars”. She should try, “Bring back the secondary moderns”. That should wake things up.

