
When Malcolm Turnbull seized power there was a brief moment when he appeared unassailable, the one who would finally transcend partisan politics and unite Australian for the first time really since Hawke.
As a vanquished opposition leader Turnbull played the martyr card to a perfect pitch, prepared to sacrifice his career for the highest principal of them all, the imperative to stare down the deniers and take meaningful action on climate change.
He donned the leather jacket and soaked up the love from progressives as he differentiated himself from his successor on same sex marriage, on the use of border protection as a political tool, on three word slogans.
When Abbott won the Lodge and confirmed he lacked the nuance to lead, Turnbull found a way to be part of the team while sending the signal to the public that things would be very different if only their wishes were fulfilled and it was he who had the top job.




If Malcolm Turnbull can't fix this mess, Tony Abbott is available | Kristina Keneally




As the new PM he had the nation in his palm, a coalition base relieved that the car was no longer heading for the cliff while progressive voters grudgingly recognised that overnight Australia had become a less conservative place.
But there was a shadow hanging over Turnbull from day one.
In order to secure the caucus numbers, he had to ditch the social policies that had differentiated him, not just from his party but from self-serving politicians in general.
On climate change Turnbull was forced to succumb to the very policy he had been killed in the ditch over, while on same sex marriage he had to sign up with Abbott’s desperate plebiscite ploy to hold back the inevitable tide.
Whether this was a failure to win the argument or a failure to show up and fight, only Malcolm knows for sure.
Regardless, both these moves saw Turnbull effectively wedge himself, cashing in the hard-won credibility for power.
Findings in this week’s Essential Report shows that problem now goes further than the PM’s personal brand – his compromises also leave him at odds with the majority of the electorate.
On climate change the majority of Australians believe climate change is real and want the government to do more:

As far as you know, do you think Australia is doing enough, not enough or too much to address climate change?

Turnbull’s problem is that while progressive voters are sending a consistent message, the coalition base is split through the middle.
Meanwhile on marriage equality, nearly two thirds of Australia back the change, that could occur in a matter of weeks with a free vote of parliament:

Do you think people of the same sex should or should not be allowed to marry?

Again it is the coalition heartland, along with the increasing pool of voters opting away form the major parties, who are most conflicted.
The problem for Turnbull is that in turning to his base, he risks alienating the majority of the public on issues that are likely to dominate the political debate over the coming 12 months.
But if the social policies are where Turnbull is seen to have let the public down, it is on the economic front where he has even greater challenges.
Those who fell for Turnbull’s Q&A shtick were not expecting a politician whose economic views were more free market than the man he replaced.
Having fought an election on trickle-down economics, the prime minister is now running a government that unashamedly puts big business first, whether it be prioritising company tax cuts or waving through structured corporate tax evasion. 
With the expectation of part-boondoggle, part-rescue package that is the $50bn submarine deal, the lack of industry policy in manufacturing leaves the government largely reliant on foreign investment for economic growth.
Problem is that foreign investment is not something the public is comfortable with:

Do you think the following types of foreign investment are good or bad for the Australian economy?

Already these tensions are being played out, with a protectionist senate cross-bench expecting more of the sorts of decisions treasurer Scott Morrison made with Chinese investment in the NSW electricity network last week.




New research: Abbott and Turnbull the worst economic managers since Menzies | Greg Jericho




Expect these tensions to be repeated on the sale of Australian farmlands and the increasing foreign ownership of real estate in our cities, identified as a key driver of the housing affordability crisis.
And here lies conflict at the heart of the Turnbull coalition: a government that is more socially conservative than the Australian electorate, but more economically liberal. It’s a tough story to sell.
Managing these contradictions is even harder when you are trying to stop your conservative base breaking to One Nation while fearing that every year more of your Wets will break Green.
To pull that political manoeuvre would require the sort of leader Malcolm Turnbull seemed to be 12 months ago, not the one he has become.

