
I came to Elizabeth Gilbert late. Her hugely enjoyable The Signature of All Things introduced me to her tenderness, her subtlety, her scholarship and her great storytelling. Her news that she has fallen in love with her best friend, Rayaa Ellias, that they are now in a same-sex relationship, and that Rayya has been diagnosed with pancreatic and liver cancer parallels a zeitgeist she has both shaped and described during her working life.




Eat, Pray, Love author Elizabeth Gilbert announces she is in a same-sex relationship




Two eternal stories – sexual love and illness – are captivating. The modern twist of cancer and the switching of sexual orientation (Gilbert’s announcement also said that she has ended her marriage to Jose Nunes, whom she met while researching Eat, Pray, Love) is an arc that seems to speak to today. This despite our knowledge that men have loved men and women and women have loved women and men throughout history.
But perhaps it resonates because we are finally beginning to recognise that sexuality is neither a binary nor fixed. That love, attraction, identity, attachment and sexuality are more layered and interesting than they have been allowed to be represented in the public space as being until now. That, as their complexity is opened up to us, the crudity of realising you were always gay or always straight is for many people a nonsense.




'Love is always complicated': Elizabeth Gilbert and the rise of later-in-life lesbians




Of course, those categories are authentic for many, and even when an individual’s desire switches it doesn’t invalidate a previous position. One can have loved a man – more than one, as I did – and then, unexpectedly and deliciously, find love with a woman. We make this an oddity, but it is not so infrequent. Life opens up in one way and then in another, and being able to take the possibilities that emerge is part of a modern moment in our little bit of the world that is exciting.
Women’s friendships, with their elasticity and comfort, their struggles to balance closeness and differentiation, are the bedrock of many women’s lives. That Gilbert should have discovered that her love of Rayya was also the love of partner, a lover, doesn’t annul her previous love.




 

Love is not one thing. It finds forms as diverse as each couple. It expresses itself uniquely as well as commonly




 

Love is not one thing. It finds forms as diverse as each couple. It expresses itself uniquely as well as commonly. And in this moment where we cannot avoid seeing so much of a world of hate, of dispossession, of despoiling, of casual and purposeful racism,of the disregarding of caring and community, Gilbert’s announcement touches us. The ordinary beauty of the personal declaration of love and standing by, and with, the dying loved one is what we remember we are capable of. It reminds us of the nobility of relationship. It reminds us of our best and better selves and of our common humanity.
Loving someone who is dying is a part of love. It hurts like hell. It is a sacred time. It is a time that can be full of gifts, of depth, of understanding, of honesty – even of humour. Sorrow is not its only marker. There can be reconciliation, forgiveness, hope, permission-giving, and many other expressions of what matters for the living and the dying. It can be a precious period.
Death is still one of our big taboos. We may know the form of writing notes, going to funerals, cooking and sitting with the bereaved. We know that mourning is not something that is over and done with easily or speedily.
To love is to have that person with you while they have nevertheless gone, and have left you. They are there and not there. This journey that Gilbert has embarked on with her Rayya, whom she will lose, and which she has chosen to tell us about, is the best of emotional literacy; of making available the struggles, the pleasures, the sadness, the anguishes and the pain that we all feel when faced with illness and death. That she will hopefully write about that experiences at some point will be a contribution to transforming culture in a way that I can only imagine will be helpful and useful, and which will allow a public rethinking of loss and mourning and loving and being. To Rayya and Elizabeth, much love.

