
“What?”
Hearing is so important in all aspects of life. It is one of our senses that is often taken for granted when we have it, and often has catastrophic effects when ignored. 




Three men rescued after becoming trapped while climbing Uluru




Australia has horrific statistics on ear disease in Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islanders and the best way to explain this is through one of my patient’s journey. May I introduce him as “T”, so he can remain anonymous. T is a friendly 46-year-old male. He presented to the emergency department with “Koori-oke” in his ear. He was frustrated that his ear was causing so much trouble for him, describing pruritis (itching) and ringing. So frustrated was he, that he had a hose and tried to flush his ears out. 
A doctor called me from the emergency department of our local hospital, apologising that they were bothering my busy day with a non-urgent consultation. They explained that this gentleman was disturbed but stressed to me that while it wasn’t an emergency, they would appreciate if I could see him. As we do with consultations, I said I was most pleased to review the patient but ensured he was not in any distress while still on the phone. He had no systemic illness, no fevers, and no discharge from his ear, his blood analysis was OK and he certainly wasn’t septic.
My thoughts on the way to see him were concerning. Not many middle-aged men present with ear problems, and certainly Aboriginal males are the least likely to present to the emergency department, so I was alarmed. When arriving in the emergency department he was outside in the waiting room. After calling him into a consultation room, we began to chat. He was a delightful man who’d had a difficult and troubled past. He left school early; he was illiterate; he was innumerate; he had been incarcerated on multiple occasions; he was unemployed and I dare say unemployable; and he had a broken down relationship. Most concerning for him, was that he was worried his young son was heading in the same direction, and he didn’t want his child to endure what he had.




 

I was initially shocked, then fascinated at the movement of the maggots in his ear.




 

Already I was heartbroken; here was a gentleman who was crying for help and enduring a dreadful way of life – one he certainly didn’t sign up for.
After a detailed history and examination I got to the origin of his problem. He had aural myiasis. That is, maggots in his ear. Here was a gentleman, an Aboriginal man, in his middle age in an urban population, in a first world country, enduring an infection that is more likely seen in a developing nation. I was initially shocked, then fascinated at the movement of the maggots in his ear when I was observing through a microscope. The infection was so severe it had eaten his ear drum (tympanic membrane) as well the bone in his ear. The irony is, the maggots probably saved him from more severe infection.
When requesting his medical file, there were several volumes that eventually arrived. Part of medicine is slightly investigative, gathering information to find out what started the problem, what treatment options have been explored and enacted upon, what worked in the past, and what has not worked? 




Intellectually disabled encouraged to plead guilty to reduce jail time, inquiry told




It was staggering for me to see that most of his file was related to his ear disease. From a very early age, T was plagued by ear disease. The sad part to read was the follow up and treatment was poorly executed for a whole lot of reasons beyond the scope of this article. However, the consequence was devastating. 
Simply put, he had multiple ear infections since the age of two and no hearing for the crucial part of his development. He started school well behind the expectations for learning, he was placed into classes that were not hearing conducive, and not surprisingly fell further behind. He misbehaved (not attributed to hearing), was kicked out of many classrooms, missed his education, left school early illiterate and innumerate, and was finally unemployed. This is ignoring the social implications that have also plagued him. I often ask the question and when I give presentations on ear disease, what if we met him at two or three years of age. Could we have changed his trajectory?
Ear disease is rampant in our Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander communities. It is no longer acceptable for us as a society to ignore the hearing issue placing a blight on Australia. We need to address the ear disease otitis media in Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander populations in Australia as a matter of urgency.

“Our stories, our way” – each week, a new guest hosts the @IndigenousX Twitter account to discuss topics of interest to them as Aboriginal and/or Torres Strait Islander people. Produced with assistance of Guardian Australia staff.


