
Is the Republican party trying to ditch Donald Trump? With each of his off-the-cuff outbursts, more Republicans fall off the Trump bandwagon.
But this wouldn’t be the first time a major party has repudiated its top figurehead. In fact, intra-party warfare is as old as America itself.




A Trump trainwreck is the only thing that will save the Republican Party | Katrina Jorgensen




When George Washington stepped down after two terms as America’s first president, the country elected Vice-President John Adams to succeed him. While Washington was nominally a founder and member of the Federalist party, it was the 1796 presidential campaign – waged between Adams and former secretary of state Thomas Jefferson – that gave rise to factional party politics.
The Adams presidency also introduced America to its first taste of how political parties, designed to promote common cause, could also turn against themselves. When Adams stood for reelection in 1800, his only major ally in the Federalist party, Alexander Hamilton, repudiated him. Writing in a public pamphlet, Hamilton argued that Adams “does not possess the talents adapted to the administration of government, and that there are great and intrinsic defects in his character, which unfit him for the office of chief magistrate”. Without Hamilton’s endorsement, Adams came in a poor third to Jefferson and Aaron Burr.
In 1840, war hero William Henry Harrison and running mate John Tyler were elected on the Whig ticket. A month later, Harrison was dead, and despite the fact the constitution did not clearly spell out the duties of a vice-president in this situation, Tyler immediately assumed the presidency. In response, Harrison’s entire cabinet – with the exception of the secretary of state, Daniel Webster – resigned in protest, and the Whigs kicked Tyler out of the party. Sometimes referred to as “His Accidency” (during his presidency and to his face), Tyler essentially served as an independent, fighting both Democrats and Whigs on most issues, including two stonewalled supreme court nominations.
Two decades later, Vice-President Andrew Johnson found himself in the same situation. In 1864, Abraham Lincoln selected Johnson – the only southern Democratic senator who’d remained loyal to the Union – as his running mate on a fusion “National Union” ticket designed to thwart challenger George McClellan. When Johnson became president after Lincoln’s assassination, he faced hostility on every front: southern Democrats viewed him as a traitor; northern Democrats didn’t trust him; Republicans opposed his lenient Reconstruction policies. This near-universal loathing for Johnson ultimately led to the first presidential impeachment, though the Senate found him not guilty.
Perhaps to erase the memory of their marriage of convenience to Johnson, the Republicans ran war hero Ulysses S Grant in 1868. He was such a beloved figure – what could go wrong?
By the end of Grant’s first term, the Republican party was coming apart at the seams. Grant’s administration was so scandal-ridden that party stalwarts put up newspaper editor Horace Greeley – one of the party’s founders – as an alternative on the Liberal Republican ticket. The Democrats, also in disarray, pinned their hopes to Greeley too, though he ended up losing badly to Grant, whose popularity far outweighed any scandal in voters’ minds.
It’s tempting to see parallels between Grant and Donald Trump: candidates with no political experience with campaigns bolstered by their name recognition. In the same way Trump supporters believe that his expertise in real estate will somehow translate to the Oval Office, so too did Grant’s admirers figure that what the White House needed was the brilliance of a military tactician. Grant failed, just as Trump will surely fail, too, if he’s elected. 
In more recent history, the Republican candidate most closely associated with party disunity is Barry Goldwater, who ran in 1964 on a platform that aimed to cut social programs, roll back advances in civil rights and even nuke Vietnam if necessary. Despite attempts by both the liberal and moderate wings of the party to mount opposition campaigns, Goldwater won the 1964 Republican nomination, telling his supporters in his acceptance speech: “I would remind you that extremism in the defense of liberty is no vice! And let me remind you also that moderation in the pursuit of justice is no virtue!”
Democrats seized on the word “extremism” – and the views behind it – and Lyndon B Johnson was elected with the widest margin in US history. 
Is 2016 shaping up to be another 1964? Will Trump’s extremism drive more and more Republican boosters away from him – and toward pulling the lever for Hillary Clinton? 
Though some have already written obituaries for the Republican party, I wouldn’t be so quick to call the undertaker. With the exception of John Adams – whose Federalist party never truly came together before he and Hamilton killed it – every other case of political repudiation has ended up strengthening the party, not weakening it. If more Republicans abandon Trump, and he goes down in flames in November, expect to see a leaner, stronger, smarter Republican party rise from the ashes.

