Nadiya Hussain confirmed her status as the poster girl for integrated Britain when, cast away on the latest Desert Island Discs, the Bake Off star chose Marmite as her luxury. Having picked the nation’s most identifiable spread, she did not really need to say, as in a characteristically articulate moment she did, that of all the many things that define her, her Britishness comes first. But it made it all the more jarring when she also spoke of the racial abuse, both verbal and physical, that once kept her indoors with her small children and which even now she takes as something to be expected, despite teetering close to being a very young national treasure.

She was not asked – Desert Island Discs is not that kind of programme – if the abuse is worse now. The Metropolitan police reckon it is up by 60% between last year and this, after Brexit and with the elision between the government’s Prevent strategy of counter-extremism and measures to promote integration, along with plans to legislate against vaguely defined “extremism”. But everything she said was a reminder that although radicalisation is a real and difficult issue, treating Muslims as the problem instead of acknowledging that social injustice plays a large part in excluding a significant minority from the aspirations and experiences of the majority only undermines the trust on which security depends.

A report from MPs on the Commons women and equalities committee published last week provided chapter and verse on the kind of discrimination that Muslim women – and men – experience in the jobs market. Unemployment among economically active Muslims is over 12%, when for the general population it is only 5.4%; four out of 10 Muslims are not even looking for work – double the national rate – and for Muslim women it is close to two thirds. This policy failure is partly obscured by the lack of evidence. Not enough data is collected to understand the diversity of the Muslim population, where the tradition has been to assume that all British Muslims have family ties with Bangladesh or Pakistan (in fact, it is only 53%), nor for the diversity of experience to be clear. If it is not known whether it is family pressure or inadequate support at jobcentres that stops women going out to work, or why girls at some schools or from some ethnicities do not go on to higher education while others are going on in greater numbers than boys, then it is hard to devise policy, and harder still to monitor its effectiveness. A report in June from the Runnymede Trust was even more critical of the government’s approach. It drew attention not only to the lack of reliable evidence, but questioned the failure to consider the wider impact of discrimination in policing and the criminal justice system.

The most troubling aspect of the committee’s report was the evidence it heard from Muslim organisations about the effect of counter-terror and anti-extremism strategies. Even though five years ago, in the early years of the coalition, the importance of the distinction between measures to help social and economic integration and measures to reduce the risk of radicalisation were stressed, senior figures in the government repeatedly equated them. In January this year, when David Cameron announced extra funding for Esol – English for speakers of other languages – he allied it with the campaign to deter a “slide towards radicalism and extremism”. In evidence given to the committee, the skills minister Nick Boles confirmed that the policy was not so much intended to help Muslim women to get on, as to stop them being radicalised.

Five years ago, urged on by Baroness Sayeeda Warsi, who warned that Islamophobia was becoming socially acceptable, a working group was set up to find out what was happening. Last October, Matthew Goodwin, one of two academics brought in as advisers, resigned in frustration at the failure of the government to provide adequate financial or ministerial backing. That lack of drive and direction behind any of the respectable-sounding strategies the government has introduced over the past six years was a recurring theme of witnesses to the equalities committee. There is a long, inglorious tradition of the British establishment claiming to take up the cause of Muslim women in order to conceal some other objective. Nadiya Hussain cannot rebuild trust between the establishment and the Muslim community on her own. The government must show that it recognises the problem is one of social justice – and tackle it with the energy Theresa May promised on the steps of Downing Street barely a month ago.