
One of the many stories about Charles de Gaulle concerns a tour he made of France after the liberation in 1944. Some of the people who turned out to cheer him preferred to forget they’d been applauding his predecessor Marshal Pétain only a few months earlier. On one such parade, someone in the crowd was heard to shout, “Vive le Maréchal!” De Gaulle is supposed to have turned to a colleague and said: “Another woman who doesn’t read the papers.”




Coronation Street apologises as nearly 300 complain about 'racist' remark




Surprisingly in 2016, it seems there are still plenty of people around, including in the media itself, who don’t read the papers, watch the news or keep up with current events. If they did, they wouldn’t get into the kind of controversy that Coronation Street has found itself in this week.
It should be pretty obvious to everyone by now that some of us were going to take exception to character Eva Price’s remark, apropos of her dyed blond hair, “I’ve got more roots than Kunta Kinte”, which was followed up with: “No idea who that is, by the way, just something my mum used to say.” Coronation Street was quick to offer the usual pro-forma apology issued in these situations but it’s depressing that it went all the way from a scriptwriter to production without any of the creatives involved noticing. Even if Eva Price and her mum don’t get it, you would expect TV people to have a handle on why those lines were a very bad idea.
It’s difficult now to remember just how groundbreaking Roots was when it first appeared on TV back in 1977. As a kid who was only used to seeing black characters as figures of fun in sitcoms, this epic historical drama was a landmark for my generation of black youth. Not only were black characters presented as fully rounded people, it was the first real attempt to present the story of slavery in something like an accurate dramatic form. It was great rather than worthy TV, and it wasn’t given a graveyard slot either. In the US, over 100 million viewers tuned in. Perhaps the people involved in Coronation Street are too young to remember the original Roots and its impact. But you would have thought they would have noticed the History Channel’s critically acclaimed, slightly reimagined, remake earlier this year.








  

‘It’s difficult now to remember just how groundbreaking Roots was when it first appeared on TV back in 1977.’ LeVar Burton as Kunta Kinte in the 1977 TV adaptation of Roots. Photograph: ABC Photo Archives/ABC via Getty Images


One of the reasons why America produces so much compelling TV and film is that those involved in it do at least seem to be aware of what’s going on around them. To some extent, Roots was a response to the rise of civil rights and an attempt to engage dramatically with the racial divide in the US, the country’s great “unsolved crime”, and its history.
In contemporary America this work is still going on. While the US is engulfed by bitter controversy about police shootings of black men and the rise of the Black Lives Matter movement, its film and TV doesn’t ignore its historical backdrop. The drama series Underground and Sundance movie smash The Birth of a Nation being only the latest examples.
Not everyone is entirely convinced by this genre. As one black friend of mine put it: “All right, we get it; slavery was a bad thing.” But that’s to ignore the fact that human evil and the response to it, for better or worse, is always going to make for gripping stories.




 

For many black women, our hair has helped us to reclaim our cultural identity and redefine notions of beauty




 

The notion that someone would think it’s acceptable for a white, female character to trivialise Kunta Kinte as she talks about her hair roots is also out of kilter with how many black women have been using their natural hair roots on a journey of political and social expression. For many black women, myself included, our hair has helped us to reclaim our cultural identity and redefine notions of beauty. This is captured in the great scene in How To get Away With Murder, where Viola Davis rips off her wig to reveal her natural hair, making black women worldwide punch the air.
But apparently in the UK, we’re still waiting to catch up when it comes to reflecting contemporary reality. It might be unfair to pick on Coronation Street specifically, but in the past, people have noticed that the show seems very white for a drama that uses modern urban England as its setting. And in general, while there’s a lot of angst about making TV programmes that aren’t quite so white and middle-class, there has been little actual progress in addressing this. No one wants to see well meaning (if leaden) attempts to shoehorn “issues” into drama. But a quick glance at the papers will at least mean that in future Coronation Street won’t be doing Kunta Kinte gags either.

