
The last time I was a host for IndigenousX on Twitter in 2013 I was six months in to my first job as a writer with Deadly Vibe magazine, one of the many great arms of the Vibe Australia company.
Started by the luminary Gavin Jones 20 years earlier, by that time, Vibe had grown in to an important media/health/education centre-point for Indigenous Australia. There was nothing else like Vibe. If you were looking for a well-run event to deliver health messages, fun, sports and Indigenous role models to impact your community there was the Vibe3on3, a travelling event that nurtured relationships with communities across the country from Maitland to Townsville to Tennant Creek. 
Deadly Vibe and InVibe magazines delivered inspiring stories and information specifically for Aboriginal and Torres Strait people around the country with the latter servicing those who were incarcerated. There was the annual Deadly Awards, a huge night for the whole Indigenous community, that celebrated and honoured those doing the great work from sports, arts, science through health. 
The most recent endeavour, the Move It Mob Style dance and culture show for ABC was a success with two Logie nominations.




Not everyone's an artist, but all prisoners would benefit from practising art | Robert Henderson for IndigenousX




 Sadly in 2014, government funds that were required to keep the company up and running were cut in order to channel them in to more “front line” health services.
Even though a report had just been handed to those that wield the pens in Canberra showing, unequivocally, that Vibe had a high success rate and routinely achieved the outcomes (better health) that the funding terms were based on, funds were pulled. The company was not able to continue and was forced to shut down services. 
I will never forget the moment Gavin sat everyone down to deliver the bad news. It was a huge shock to everyone but the emotional weight and devastation that Gavin was carrying was clearly visible, for someone with so much light it was heartbreaking to see, he was almost unable to sit upright in his chair, let alone speak. It truly broke his spirit having to let go of everything he had built in an act of care, respect and love for his culture. 
Sadly Gavin passed away only a couple of weeks after the defunding announcement was made. All who worked with and knew Gavin, say unanimously that he was one of the most generous, visionary and big-hearted people you would ever meet and whose presence exuded warmth. 
Vibe was really an extension of Gavin’s care and positive vision for Indigenous Australia and in losing Vibe he knew that the impact would be felt not only immediately by the Vibe staff, but also the communities and the youth that Vibe had been positively impacting through many different mediums. 
I feel blessed to have spent what was to be only a short time in the trajectory of Vibe, and I will forever be grateful to Gavin and the rest of the Vibe family for giving me my first opportunity in Indigenous media. It was a dream job. But I hope that another Vibe does not come in to existence: because the only way that it would float would be with government funding.
Vibe was only one of many organisations that lost the ability to continue within the Indigenous sector and across the board we see Aboriginal organisations relying heavily on government funding. To exist within this space, as anyone that has ever had to rely on assistance knows well, is a precarious position.
Of course, many couldn’t exist without some form of assistance, but wouldn’t it be great to have self-sufficient Aboriginal owned and operated media organisations, that were not at the mercy of shifting governments and priorities. 
Since Vibe, I have moved in to a broadcasting position with Koori Radio and also producing online for NITV (National Indigenous TV). Again, there is a great sense of family in both organisations and I feel so lucky to be in the position that I am. I love what I do. 
Aboriginal directed media is crucial in the Australian landscape, that at best can only empathise with the very serious and complex issues that concern our communities. 
But there is that uneasy feeling that creeps up every now and again, wondering how long the ride will last, when we turn the next corner, will it all be pulled out from underneath us? 
How do we prove ourselves continuously “worthy’ of support and the means we need to continue to produce? 




My art is a personal antidote for the effects of colonisation | Katie West for @IndigenousX




I have met some of the most delightful, hard working and spirited people on my journey in Indigenous media so far, both Indigenous and non-Indigenous alike. All standing for a more equal, embracing and cohesive society. The kind of people that this world needs more of. 
It saddens me to know that in the reality of some, these qualities hold little to no value. To be at the mercy of that is not the path we want to keep treading. It is my hope that we continue to look for ways and keep building the groundswell, of which I see happening slowly but surely, of platforms for independent Indigenous media and organisations to continue to offer places where we can keep working, giving voices to those that need it the most, without the fear of having it all stripped away in a moment. 
I don’t know the answers but I know that life is woven with the fabric of the stories that we tell. We are the greatest storytellers – let’s start telling the ones with the most glorious endings.
“Our stories, our way” – each week, a new guest hosts the @IndigenousX Twitter account to discuss topics of interest to them as Aboriginal and/or Torres Strait Islander people. Produced with assistance of Guardian Australia staff.

