





Martin Kettle: All we learned is that no one knows what they want
Until today David Davis had kept the lowest profile of the three Conservative Brexiteers to whom Theresa May has given the task of implementing the 23 June Brexit vote. He is also, by some distance, the most interesting. Listening to his bland statement on Brexit to MPs this afternoon, though, you would never have guessed it.
Davis, head of the new department of Brexit, yields nothing to either Liam Fox or Boris Johnson in self-esteem. Yet Davis is a deeper and more nuanced political figure than the other two. As a working-class small-state libertarian for whom cabinet office has come late (he is 67), his reputation, which took a huge hit after he lost the Tory leadership to David Cameron in 2005, now stands or falls on what he achieves on the most important subject in British politics.
Davis’s statement today gave nothing away. Everything that he said had already been said by May in her interview at the weekend with Andrew Marr, in her Hangzhou press conference or elsewhere. Indeed the only new fact in his statement was to confirm that it would be May, not Davis, Fox or Johnson, who would lead the Brexit negotiations. The idea that the Brexiteers would formally set the agenda for the Brexit talks seems dead, if indeed it ever existed.




David Davis - backed by Boris Johnson and Liam Fox - sets out Brexit plans - Politics live




Over the summer there has been much comment about the turf wars between Johnson and Fox. Don’t underestimate Davis in this regard, however. We know he has very strong views on delivering an export-led set of trade deals that put him on a collision course with Fox. In his generally anodyne statement he was careful to mention issues – trade and business – that Fox, whose brief is non-EU trade, will nevertheless regard as his own.
The reality is that the Brexit department is embarking on a course whose detailed destination it does not know. The real revelation in government policy on the EU in the last few days has been that no one – not Davis, not May, not anyone – actually knows what kind of a Brexit deal they really want. Politically, migration is top of the government’s agenda, but the balance between migration control and EU single market access is speculation, even within Whitehall, because not only do ministers disagree but the EU does too.





Mark Wallace: Davis has shown he is still a formidable performer
What Brexit takes away, it can also give. While David Cameron and George Osborne were cast out of government by the referendum, David Davis has found himself lifted on to the frontbench, a full eight years after he chose – unwisely – to leave it. While some new to the despatch box can look a little nervy, particularly if they have just been handed responsibility for a hugely complex brief, he seemed completely at ease.
That’s not surprising; having cut his teeth as Europe minister in John Major’s troubled government, he knows the issues inside out, and he has spent recent years preparing in detail for the Brexit process.
If anyone thought that his time spent as a freelance campaigner on the backbenches might have diluted his aptitude for parliamentary performance, they were mistaken. He has evidently never lost the very specific skill set required to bat from the ministerial crease – friends were welcomed, enemies rebuffed and technicalities negotiated, and his position remained firm throughout.
His opponents failed to produce anything to seriously unsettle him. The SNP angrily demanded more detail, but he remained insistent on doing things in his own good time, thank you very much. If anything, Emily Thornberry’s attempt to insist that MPs get a vote on the outcome of the referendum seemed to add fuel to his fire, as he denounced her as an opponent of democracy, trying to stymie the will of the people.
The new Brexit secretary demonstrated to the Commons that he was still a formidable performer, with the expertise and the rhetorical speed to defend his position. The big question will be whether he ever needs to deploy a similar defence at the cabinet table, should the prime minister’s position come to differ from his. It is hard to imagine him backing down in that circumstance, either.





Deborah Orr: We won’t know what the mandate mandated for years
There’s something a bit cart before the horse about this whole Brexit thing. David Davis, the Parliamentary Supremacist in Chief, reiterated in the Commons today that there was a national mandate for leaving the EU. He added, rather too quickly, that having provided the mandate so obligingly, “people will want to know what Brexit will mean”.
Leaving the EU meant different things to different people. (While staying in simply meant staying in.) In the coming months and years, leavers will learn whether the national mandate they assisted in providing was they one they had in mind or the one someone else had in mind.
If Davis knew what sort of national mandate he had in mind, he doesn’t seem too keen to draw attention to the fact. He is staring, it seems, at a blank sheet of paper, on which he is eager to doodle. Davis is gathering together a large department, who will busy themselves with sounding out as many organisations and people as possible, before deciding exactly what our “new freedoms, new opportunities and new horizons” are going to be. If only we could stay in this state of excited anticipation forever, the unknown future always bright.
Davis was, for a man so concerned with “the sovereignty and supremacy of this parliament”, awfully bossy about the kind of EU he wants to see after we’ve left. He wants it to be strong, steadfast and successful. He just doesn’t want Britain to take part in such an endeavour. Anyone used to subsidy from the EU, however, can relax until 2020, when EU promises already made will be reassessed.
Which basically means that a lot of people won’t have that much clarity what the national mandate mandated until four more years have passed. No wonder people are already acting like the Brexit vote never happened. Even Davis seems keen to make long-winded assertions promising that long-winded assertions will have to wait.

