
What’s happening to Rudy Giuliani?
On Monday, he slammed Beyoncé’s VMA performance, calling it a “shame” and boasting: “I saved more black lives than any of those people you saw onstage.” On Tuesday, USA Today published an op-ed by Giuliani where he gave a veneer of mainstream media respectability to the idea that Hillary Clinton is hiding grave medical issues – despite the fact that there’s no evidence for this beyond wishful thinking on the part of the alt-right. 
In the days after the 9/11 terrorist attacks on New York, Giuliani was dubbed “America’s Mayor”. Now, from his fiery convention speech to his specious claim that there were no terrorist attacks in the eight years before Barack Obama’s election, the former New York City mayor often seems to make pronouncements that are divorced from reality.
But that’s not new. That’s Rudy Giuliani. As New Yorkers learned early on during his administration as mayor in 1990s, Giuliani has always had a penchant for bluster, for taking credit from his subordinates, and for an authoritarian single-mindedness. No wonder he’s stumping for Donald Trump.




Rudy Giuliani: I've 'saved more black lives' than Beyoncé




I can’t say I envy him as he tries to secure his legacy. Being America’s Mayor is an impossible act to follow, and leading New York City has long been considered the “second toughest job in America”. By implication, there’s only one step up – the White House – and in 2007, Giuliani threw his hat into the presidential ring. Riding on his post-9/11 fame, Giuliani was an early favorite, but after dismal results in the early primaries, he withdrew in January 2008.
Was his failure merely due to the fact that no New York City mayor has ever bridged the gap from city hall to the Oval Office? Or was there something more in Giuliani’s brash personality and his law-and-order mentality that couldn’t make the transition to a national audience?
Giuliani rose to national prominence when America was reeling from the 9/11 attacks. And as lawyer Ron Kuby points out in the documentary Giuliani Time, in a crisis people are looking for a powerful authority figure. But what about the other eight years of his mayoralty? Most people realize that what works in a crisis isn’t necessarily appropriate at other times – but that never stopped Giuliani. To him, New York had always been under attack.
At the beginning of his first term, Giuliani gave a chilling speech in which he said: “Freedom is not a concept in which people can do anything they want, be anything they can be. Freedom is about authority. Freedom is about the willingness of every single human being to cede to lawful authority a great deal of discretion about what you do.”
He proceeded to put his words into action. First, he made good on a campaign promise to clean up squeegee men – launching the so-called “broken windows” era that would end up disproportionately jailing black people and other minorities. He then embraced the ideas of transit cop Jack Maple and helped launch CompStat, the city’s data-driven crime-fighting system. It can’t be denied that crime fell – and that’s how Giuliani is today able to claim he saved “more black lives” than Beyoncé. 
But despite CompStat’s real successes, it also can’t be denied that crime was already falling when he took office – and it was happening nationwide. Later, when New York police commissioner William Bratton landed on the cover of Time magazine as New York’s top crime fighter, Giuliani pushed him out for taking too much credit. 
There were other clear signs of paranoia during the Giuliani years. Long before the World Trade Center attacks, the front steps of city hall – a place for public gatherings and protest – were sealed off by police barricades that remain in place today. The administration claimed it was a security measure; the mayor’s detractors felt certain it was done to limit access and stifle free speech. 
Giuliani’s city hall was also the subject of constant lawsuits. Some were filed by other city agencies to which he wouldn’t release necessary data; others were brought by individuals whose whose constitutional rights were being violated by the city. Many of those lawsuits were still being settled – for millions of dollars – years into the administration of Mike Bloomberg, Giuliani’s successor.
In short, Rudy Giuliani wasn’t a great mayor, or even a good one. But on one terrible day, he was a strong, decisive one. He could have faded quietly into history, remembered as the man who kept the city together in its hour of need. Instead, by becoming Donald Trump’s attack dog, the former mayor has instead ensured that his larger-than-life ego and his combative abrasiveness – the qualities New Yorkers remember all too well, and which kept him from the presidency – will ultimately define his legacy.

