

Debt: $5,000 +
Source: Credit card
Estimated years until debt-free: One year
I never had a credit card until I was 47 years old. I knew better. I’m impulsive and I like to shop, particularly when I’m feeling down. Having watched a number of friends set their whole lives on fire with credit cards in their 20s, I decided I would hold off on that particular perk of grownup life.
 Then I got fired. I had signed on to work with a major online media company a year and a half ago and was thrust into a management position for the first time in my life with zero managerial training. As a result, I made pretty much every single rookie mistake a new supervisor can make and after nine weeks, I was unceremoniously chucked overboard.
 The next morning, I nervously opened my bank’s website to see how exactly how much money I had/didn’t have in my checking and savings accounts. After I entered my password, a splash screen asked me if I’d like to get a credit card.




Tell us about your life in the red: how do you survive with debt?




 I checked the “Yes” bubble because there wasn’t a “Hell, yes!” option. I’d been cast out into the open waters of unemployment, but here was what could potentially be a little life raft to keep our household from going under entirely.
 My shiny new credit card arrived a week later, but ironically, immediately after I got fired I found myself freelancing for three different companies and making plenty of money. With an eye toward building credit, I would buy little things here and there – never more than $150 at a time – and then pay them off the next month.
 That worked fine for a little while, but then one company I worked for went out of business and the other hired someone to do the job I was freelancing for. My partner’s hours got reduced at his job due to budget cutbacks. We took a deep breath and tightened our belts.
I sent out a blizzard of résumés and pitched ideas to different media companies with mixed results. Our number of luxurious meals out was sharply reduced. I declared a full moratorium on clothing purchases and other superficial pleasures and concentrated on keeping us within our budget.
Then our 17-year-old cat got sick. He’s fine now, but only after 11 vet visits, two procedures with anesthesia and multiple rounds of four different medications. Our touch-and-go financial state had already decimated my savings account. So, out came the credit card.
Then my Affordable Care Act healthcare premium spiked to $250 a month – not so affordable – and I got sick. I would wake up in the morning doubled over with vomiting and the most intense pain I’ve ever felt radiating from the center of my abdomen. I broke my leg in three places when I was a kid and it was that same kind of hot, explosive bone-break pain, but in my stomach.




I defaulted on my student loans. Then the sheriff turned up at my door | Darryl Wellington




I went to the emergency room over and over as doctors scratched their heads and puzzled over my chart. Finally, after an upper endoscopic exam that cost me $1,700 after insurance, we found a treatment that worked.
When the hospital called and said a “prompt payer” discount would cut my ER bill almost in half, out came the credit card. And then again. And again.
I kept trying to hustle up work, but the debt began to pile up. My car needed new brakes, so I put that on the credit card. Then I had to get a cash advance to pay the rent.
By spring, I was beginning to feel downright nihilistic about the whole thing. We’re just going to use this credit card until it breaks, I told myself, and then figure something else out.
Now, regular work has started rolling back in and while we’re not exactly flush with cash, I’ve stopped using the card and started paying down the debt. I think about it like I think about my still-extant student loans. It’s a slow-burning fire that I throw a bucket of water on when I’ve got the water to spare. So far that’s kept it from setting the drapes alight and burning down the whole house.




I work at a bank and I'm $86,000 in debt | Andreina Guevara




Would I change anything from the last year and a half? Probably not. Given the same circumstances, I’m pretty sure I would choose a similar course all over again except that I really wish I’d never taken that awful job.
And my credit card? Maybe one day we’ll be friends again. Right now it’s in Time Out in a drawer in my room while I pay down the more than $5,000 I spent. It will probably take me at least a year to pay it off, which I’m doing with a little money from each check that comes in.
It was, as I said, a safety measure in lean times and using it might have saved my cat’s life, so I can’t be too mad about it. I’m just hoping that I can get enough of it paid off that I’m ready for the inevitable next set of emergencies. 

