
In a famous eulogy published following his death in 1881, the Times wrote of the 19th-century Tory prime minister Benjamin Disraeli that he “discerned the Conservative working man in the inarticulate mass of the English populace, as the sculptor perceives the angel imprisoned in a block of marble”.
Can Disraeli’s admirer Theresa May already discern the shape of her Brexit deal imprisoned in the block of marble too? This week’s cabinet meeting at Chequers gave us some clues about the Britain the prime minister sees in her mind’s eye. A briefing stressed that curbing migration is a red line, and that Britain is not interested in an off-the-shelf deal with Europe but a bespoke one. Nevertheless it is still far from clear, perhaps even to May herself, what will emerge once she has finished with her hammer and chisel.




Restricting immigration will be at heart of Brexit deal, Theresa May says




May’s well-tried line about Brexit meaning Brexit has been a useful summer defence against attempts to bounce her into committing herself before she was ready. It allowed her to scotch suspicions that a predominantly pro-remain government would attempt to renege on the people’s verdict. It also bought her time to clarify what, in her view, Brexit really adds up to. But its shelf-life is over now and decision time is getting close.
Wednesday’s cabinet meeting showed that what Brexit really means is still a work in progress. To extend the sculpture analogy, it showed that May has begun to shape and narrow the block of marble without starting to cut irrevocably into it. The precise outlines of the figure to be carved remain hidden. But some things are now not in doubt.
It was always clear, for instance, that meaningful migration controls would be at the heart of any Brexit package that May will accept. Border controls are crucial to the social reform Toryism she stands for. That was explicitly confirmed this week. Free movement as we know it will end. The rules governing movement to and from the 27 remaining European Union member states will change. Downing Street claims to have a pretty clear idea of what it wants to achieve.
Likewise, it has always been obvious that May will look to maintain existing EU single market trading links as much as possible. As an aim it’s a no-brainer. But the reality is something else. You can’t be in the single market without free movement, so if the UK forsakes free movement, in what sense can it still access the single market? Deciding how far to push that is not a dilemma for London, but one for the whole EU.
True, it is a mistake to think that no compromises whatever are possible. The single market is not just one undifferentiated system. Services, digital issues, energy and transport are all not fully unified. Even rights to free movement can be differentiated – like existing length of stay, the position of dependents, students and, in particular, those in and with offers of employment.








  

Theresa May at Chequers: ‘Wednesday’s cabinet meeting showed that what Brexit really means is still a work in progress.’ Photograph: Getty Images


Nevertheless, it is naive to imagine May either wants to or could deliver continued freedom of movement in the aftermath of the Brexit vote. The Brexit vote was many things, but at its heart it was a revolt against migration, both real and imagined. Others may be in denial about this, but the prime minister certainly is not.
It therefore follows that Britain has not got a hope in hell of negotiating a deal that keeps the country in the single market after Brexit. Freedom of movement is not a detail, to be casually set aside. And if the UK is determined to end freedom of movement, it also follows that UK access to the single market will be very limited.
Not enough people have grasped this yet. Charles Grant of the Centre for European Reform thinktank says “the British people are living in cloud cuckoo land” about the economic impact. Most prophets of post-Brexit economic doom are lying low at the moment – August’s rebound in manufacturing being the latest reason for them to do so. But it is hard to imagine how a Britain outside the single market will not struggle.




 

All the choices that follow from Brexit are difficult – and many of them are very bad ones indeed




 

That’s why the real political tension in the May cabinet is actually not between the remainers and the leavers, as many have too easily assumed. People who were at the meeting claim there is reasonable agreement among ministers about the shape of the strategy so far. The bigger faultline is the one between the Treasury, which wants the single market to be the priority, and No 10, which puts migration control first.
Since No 10 will ultimately win that battle, the question is how the Treasury will react. In its determination to maintain the City of London’s global position outside the single market, the Treasury will find itself inexorably drawn down the road towards remaking the UK as an offshore, low-tax financial haven. Just at the very moment when the EU locks horns with Apple over sweetheart tax deals, so Britain may roll out the welcome mat to international corporations such as Apple, offering Britain as the new Ireland, or as a European Singapore.
There was a sign of that changing mood this week when Carolyn Fairbairn, the new head of the CBI, urged the government to allow the banks to come “off the naughty step”, said City regulators should prioritise competitiveness and proposed scrapping the current 8% surcharge on bank profits. George Osborne’s brief post-referendum flirtation with a low corporation tax regime was ended by his sacking in July. But the pressure on Philip Hammond to follow that path seems likely to grow as the shape of the Brexit stance gradually becomes clearer this autumn.
This will present May with a huge dilemma. If she sanctions a drive towards lower tax, lighter-touch financial regulation, she will delight the Thatcherite Brexiteers such as the international trade secretary, Liam Fox. He told Wednesday’s meeting that Britain had to rediscover a Victorian buccaneering spirit – language that may not travel as well as Fox imagines. May herself talked this week about forging a unique new role for the UK in the world, so some of that may have rubbed off on her.




Has Theresa May really thrown in her lot with the Brexiteers? | Jackie Ashley




But a re-embrace of City bankers and an even more sumptuous welcome mat to global corporations would be disastrous for the Tories. A decent opposition would make hay with it. It would make a mockery of the claim that Britain should be “a country that works for everyone”. This claim has been central to May’s political positioning ever since the referendum (and indeed long before that). And it is now to be the theme of the post-referendum Tory party conference in Birmingham next month.
May and her ministers aren’t stupid people. They know they are advancing into an autumn in which all the big political and economic calls are connected and all have big consequences. They mostly understand the problems they face. What they lack at this stage are the answers. But the inescapable truth is that all the choices that follow from Brexit are difficult – and many of them are very bad ones indeed.
Some may see an angel in the block of marble. Many others will fear it is a monster.

