Voters in the Philippines knew what they were getting when they backed Rodrigo Duterte overwhelmingly in this year’s presidential election. As mayor of the southern city of Davao he was wildly popular for his harsh anti-crime campaign: “How do you think I did it? … Kill them all,” he proclaimed. He suggested that under his presidency, fish would grow fat on the bodies of 100,000 criminals.

Mr Duterte has a well-earned reputation for wild and often foul-mouthed statements, but there was a record behind the bluster. Death squads claimed at least 1,000 lives during his term in Davao. He earned the nicknames The Punisher and Duterte Harry. He appears to like them.

Now, having pledged the impossible – ending crime and corruption nationwide within six months – Mr Duterte is in a hurry. Even as he celebrated his victory in June, he urged vigilantes to shoot drug dealers who resisted arrest. Then he urged people to “go ahead and kill” addicts as it would be too painful for the parents of users to do it. One top Philippine official has described the crackdown as a “necessary evil” in pursuit of the greater good.

On Tuesday the national police chief denied that there was a declared policy to kill users and pushers, but he acknowledged that about 1,900 killings had been recorded since Mr Duterte took office seven weeks ago, far more than previously believed. About 800 of those took place during police operations, including strikingly odd deaths in custody. One father and son were shot dead after grabbing an officer’s gun, officials said. An investigation by an independent government body said the two men had already been incapacitated by severe beatings.

Mr Duterte gives short shrift to those with qualms, accusing prominent critics of being involved in the drugs trade themselves. This weekend he threatened to leave the United Nations after human rights experts warned that allegations of trafficking should be judged in the courts and not by gunmen. He suggested he might invite China and African nations to form a new organisation – a heavy-handed reminder to American patrons that he may warm ties with Beijing.

South-east Asia has been here before. Under Thaksin Shinawatra’s leadership, Thailand’s 2003 “war on drugs” saw 2,800 extrajudicial killings in three months. Four years later, an official report found that more than half the victims had no connection to drugs. They included a nine-year-old boy shot dead as police chased his mother. Thailand’s drug trade has proved resilient.

Such drives inevitably claim innocent lives and kill users as well as dealers. But the core objection is simply that no one should die like this. Extrajudicial executions undermine the rule of law. They make a country less safe, not more.

Senators are investigating the killings, but so far Mr Duterte’s stance appears highly popular – reflecting the toll that crime and violence has taken on Philippine society and the failure of the political class to get to grips with them. The US and others have expressed deep concern, but rights campaigners warn that it is hard to see an end in sight unless the US and EU nations make it clear that continuing will result in economic and diplomatic penalties. There is every sign that Mr Duterte will attempt to play them off against Beijing. They should stand firm.