I want death: three plain words encapsulate the horror and the shame of the treatment of asylum seekers on Nauru. That a child at the very start of life should want only to end it is a tragedy. That so many held in Australia’s offshore immigration centre express that kind of despair, as revealed in documents leaked to the Guardian, tells you the system is a disgrace. The Nauru files tally callousness and outright cruelty towards the hundreds of asylum seekers held on the island since 2012.

Each of these cases is an affront. But their volume matters too; this is not about isolated errors or abuses. There are more than 2,000 incident reports, more than half involving children, who account for less than a fifth of those incarcerated. They include seven reports of sexual assault, 59 of assault, 30 of self-harm and 159 of threatened self-harm – and yet staff from Save the Children, who wrote many of these reports, say they are the tip of the iceberg. We know, too, that adults on the island live in fear and despair. We read of a mother-to-be begging authorities to take her baby, knowing she cannot protect it.

The guards – and the company that employs them, Wilson Security – must take the blame for some of what happens on Nauru. Though some appear compassionate and committed to supporting detainees, others are clearly unfit to work there. No doubt they are hardened by the daily misery, but it is hard to imagine how any human could laugh upon seeing that a traumatised child had sewn her lips together, as some officers allegedly did. The bigger issue is that the system dehumanises the desperate. The psychiatrist who previously oversaw their care has described the environment as “inherently toxic”.

The justification for Nauru – and a second detention centre on Papua New Guinea’s Manus Island – was that they would deter asylum seekers from boarding boats to Australia. More than three-quarters of those whose claims have been assessed have been found to be refugees, with a well-founded fear of persecution and a legal right to protection. The boats are still setting out, but being turned back – in some cases, taking their passengers to jail for their attempts to leave. In any case, no one is deterred by misery that they cannot see; and they cannot see it because it has been hidden deliberately. Media access is expensive and has been highly selective. Since last year, those working in the system can be jailed for “unauthorised disclosures”. Some have blown the whistle anyway; traumatologist Paul Stevenson said he had never seen more atrocity in a four-decade career that included helping victims of the Bali bombings and Boxing Day tsunami.

Officials and politicians appear to hope that, once out of sight, asylum seekers will be out of mind, too. But ignoring the problems does not and cannot make them go away. They mount as the days pass because humans cannot live without hope. The UN high commission for refugees warns of a progressive deterioration in the situation.

This is not “offshore processing” but warehousing. The centre holds a relatively small number of refugees: 442. A few hundred more live outside on this impoverished island of just 9,000 citizens, with tensions already evident. If Australia will not accept them, it should explore a third country option seriously. Instead, it rejected New Zealand’s offer to take in 150.

Both the government and the opposition back the current arrangements, though Labor’s Bill Shorten has now called for increased oversight and the appointment of a children’s commissioner to protect the welfare of those in immigration detention. Those measures, like increased transparency – ensuring access for the media and UN investigators, for instance – might bring minimal improvements but cannot address the fundamental shortcomings.

If the test of a civilised society is how we treat the vulnerable, there can hardly be a greater condemnation than indifference towards those exposed twice over, because of their age and because they have fled their country. Britain, too, has a wretched record in this regard. It has taken in just 20 unaccompanied children of the hundreds it promised to accept, while more than 600 remain in squalor in Calais. Nauru cannot offer a home and should never have been made a dumping ground. But even if the growing clamour over its miseries can bring an end to this system, it embodies a hostility to asylum seekers – in Australia and beyond – that will persist and must be tackled.