
How would you feel if your local copper had a tiny anchor inked behind her ear? Or if the officer who pulled you over had a full sleeve on his left arm? Earlier this week the Police Federation of England and Wales challenged a ban on visible tattoos “on the beat”. Although the Home Office guidance in respect of tattoos on police officers does not explicitly prohibit body art, several forces, including the Metropolitan police, have instituted outright bans on recruits with ink on the hands, neck or face, while existing officers are required to cover up their tattoos at work.
The federation’s logic is that tattoos are becoming more widely accepted in society at large, and that a ban serves to reduce the applicant pool, especially for younger people interested in becoming police officers. They are right on both points.
Accurate statistics are hard to come by in the UK, but a recent poll in the United States found that some 40% of US households had at least one person with a tattoo. It is perhaps not surprising to learn that young people are more likely to have tattoos than those of their parents’ generation. But, of course, young people don’t stay young for ever. That’s why there has been a growing acceptance of tattoos in the wider society.




Am I going to regret my tattoo? You asked Google – here’s the answer | Sarah Marsh




The arguments against tattoos in the workplace are generally anachronistic. Although body art used to be associated with delinquency and a certain counter-cultural rebelliousness, these days it’s increasingly rebellious in some social circles for one not to have a tattoo.
The question of whether your body art will impact on your employment prospects depends on a number of factors.
First, can your tattoo be easily concealed? If it can be covered up by clothing, then it is unlikely to have any real effect on your employability – until, that is, your boss invites you to a pool party.
Second, what is the genre of the tattoo? Racist, sexist, sectarian and vulgar images are likely to be viewed more negatively than, say, a recreation of Van Gogh’s The Starry Night.
Third, is the job you are applying for primarily public-facing? Whereas body art is unlikely to have much impact on one’s employability in “behind-the-scenes” jobs, it is very likely to have a huge impact for those roles that require regular customer interaction.
Finally, how old is the target demographic of customer for your organisation? While tattoos are likely to be a liability in workplaces that attract an older clientele, they can actually be an asset in organisations that target younger consumers.
Although the police force does not have “customers” per se, it would not be unreasonable to assume that its officers regularly interact with younger people, many of whom will have tattoos themselves.
During my research on the effects of body art in the workplace, I recall a conversation with a human resources manager in the Scottish Prison Service. When recruiting for the role of prison guard, he mentioned that he was keen to interview candidates with visible body art. When I asked why, he explained that many prisoners are tattooed, and that a visible tattoo on a guard can serve as a conversation starter and a source of social bonding.
This managerial insight is consistent with historical studies of tattoos that view them as tribal phenomena indicating a shared, in-group membership. I suspect a similar logic might apply to a visibly tattooed police officer who forms a connection with at-risk members of the community, many of whom will be covered in tattoos.
If you’re thinking of heading down to your nearest body-art studio and getting that tattoo you’ve always wanted, you might want to hold that thought for a moment or two. Although tattoos are becoming more widely accepted and, in a unique set of circumstances, can even be an asset in your job search, you should still be aware that employment discrimination on the basis of tattoos is legal. Tattoo status is not a protected category, so if your employer doesn’t like your ink, you’re out of luck.

