Even as victims underwent treatment and the debris was being swept up, Thai authorities were quick to state that they were in control after multiple explosions killed at least four and injured dozens on Thursday night and Friday morning. The attacks did not amount to terrorism but merely “local sabotage … restricted to limited areas and provinces”, police said.

Control is, after all, the junta’s raison d’etre. The military says its 2014 coup was necessary to end unrest and “return happiness” to Thailand after a cycle of mass protests and violence. Last week, the public approved a new constitution, which in theory paves the way for elections and tackles corruption but, notably, entrenches military power and institutionalises impunity for abuses. Officials have hinted that political opponents could be to blame for the bombings – and some analysts think so too, citing the timing: just after the constitution vote and on the eve of the queen’s birthday. Others are less sure, suggesting that links to a long-running southern insurgency cannot be ruled out and that the military is bound to play down a terrorist threat which could damage tourism – two resorts were hit – and to paint its critics in the worst possible colours. So far, details of the bombing do not offer a natural fit with either explanation and other theories (perhaps a conflict within the elite) cannot be excluded.

What is clear is the contrast between the violence and the stability the ruling National Council for Peace and Order says it has brought. It describes its rule as transitional, but Prayuth Chan-ocha, the regime’s head, says Thailand is already “99.9% democratic”, and no one is holding their breath for the general election date, now mooted for late 2017. The NCPO has overseen a further disturbing deterioration in human rights, and the constitution was passed with a clear majority but on a low turnout, after campaigning against it was banned. Its approval may reflect public weariness with military rule and a desire to move on, however imperfectly, rather than satisfaction with the regime.

Behind all these manoeuvrings lie elite concerns that tensions bubbling under the surface could soon break through. The junta declares its priority to be defending the monarchy, which has established itself in the popular imagination as the stabilising moral force holding the nation together. But the world’s longest-serving monarch, King Bhumibol, is now gravely ill, and few believe his son can play the same role and muster that support. It would be better if the potential consequences could be addressed honestly, but Thailand’s stringent lèse-majesté laws are used increasingly aggressively to penalise political dissent. In the background looms Thaksin Shinawatra, the exiled populist tycoon who twice stormed to electoral victory, only to be deposed in a 2006 coup. He enriched himself and his friends, undermined or closed independent institutions, and his tenure saw a string of human rights violations, including 2,700 extrajudicial executions in an anti-drugs campaign and a harsh crackdown on the south, which caused decades-old grievances to explode into violence that is now endemic. But he was wildly popular and several proxies followed him, the last of them being his sister Yingluck, ejected in the last coup.

Thailand has seen 19 of those since the absolute monarchy ended in 1932. But in recent years, the forces underlying political conflicts have shifted. Thaksin is a symptom, not a cause; he won by allying business interests to the rural poor, promising benefits such as cheap healthcare. The latter are no longer prepared to be ruled by and for urban elites; the old social contract has broken. They want a bigger slice of the pie and they want to get it by picking their own leader.

Many in Thailand are nervous about what the future holds, and they have good cause. The military has exploited anxiety to defend its own interests. But control can only suppress, not dissolve, the underlying tensions; and it will not do even that for ever. Sooner or later the country must face up to these challenges.