
After barely two months in office, Filipino president Rodrigo Duterte’s colourful words are already catching up with him. Duterte is playing a high-stakes game with global superpowers, and in calling Barack Obama “the son of a whore” – before hastily claiming it wasn’t personal – he has clearly demonstrated his hollow foreign policy.




Bozos, goat lovers and sons of whores: a history of political insults




During his campaign Duterte had both the confidence and good cause to speak out against the overbearing US influence on the Philippines. Indeed it was one of the issues that marked him out against the Manila oligarchy’s continuity candidates. It is difficult to understand the extent and level of resentment there is to diplomatic, economic and cultural American dependency among the general public, but any leader bold enough to call for “a foreign policy reset” was an obvious, and much-demanded opportunity for change.
The terms of this foreign policy reset have not been stated, or the reset process even thought through. This has been a chaotic couple of months for the nation, and the administration is without any short-term direction, other than the mass of extra-judicial killings in the war on drugs. As a former US colony, the Philippines is unlikely to dilute US influence quickly, and Duterte’s overt anti-colonial tone is, thus far, mere words. Words that are only causing the country embarrassment and not redressing the unbalanced US-Filipino relationship. Duterte’s sensitivity to condemnation of his murderous crusade against drugs and his assertion of sovereignty is yet to be backed up with any actual shift in foreign policy.
The most obvious change would be to deny or limit US access to military bases – on this Duterte has so far been quiet. The Enhanced Defense Cooperation Agreement, ratified in January, locked in the next administration, but Duterte has little regard for the law or protocol. Relics of previous eras of cosy US-Filpino relations in the shape of Clark Air Base and the Subic Bay Naval Base (the two largest overseas US military bases) were back on the table and US aircraft were quickly relocated from Korea to Clark. Further deals with Japan and Australia have also locked in regional alliances against China. Duterte is not offering a convincing alternative model for US-Filipino relations other than cheap insults.
In contrast, despite a frosty relationship with China from the back-end of the Benigno Aquino administration, Duterte has looked (relatively) more diplomatic and open to engagement. Movement in the islands disputes in the South China Sea and the recent, if fairly meaningless, legal victory in the UN’s court of arbitration, initiated unilaterally under Aquino, has been noted. Duterte is openly courting Chinese investment to build much-needed infrastructure. Some observers have suggested there is the possibility of a healthier balance for the Philippines, but it is unclear what that means – Islands for railways perhaps?
It is worth noting that Duterte considers himself a socialist, who has offered rebel communists cabinet positions and peace deals, but he is also a nationalist. At the age of 71 he has threatened to jetski to disputed islands and plant the Filipino flag himself. Such campaign bluster on the islands though has been replaced by talk of a deal with the Chinese. The issue cannot be ignored entirely as Duterte meets his counterparts at the ASEAN summit in Laos.
In short, there is little Duterte can offer the Chinese other than surrender of the US alliance and the islands. Neither is likely nor in the better interests of the Filipino people.




The Guardian view on the Philippine war on drugs: street justice is no justice | Editorial




Duterte has thus far been uncharacteristically quiet in regard to his ASEAN neighbours where there is significant unease about his leadership. For many he is fuelling an already tense Sino-American confrontation to little end. Somewhat hypocritically, Duterte is prepared to infringe on Indonesian sovereignty to seek mercy for convicted Filipino drug trafficker Mary Jane Veloso. While it is a noble effort, Duterte may well struggle to get far with President Widodo given his push to reinstate the death penalty back in the Philippines, and his lawless campaign of murder against drug users and dealers.
Many in Washington will be watching closely, but until it is clear what Duterte wants as payment as he auctions the country to the highest bidding superpower, there will be little concern about Duterte’s insults. His brand of anti-American populism is certainly a few notches below that which helped Hugo Chavez to power in Venezuela, but it is a dangerously isolationist path to take, as most Venezuelans would now attest.
Many in the state department should also welcome a different relationship with the Philippines that could be good for Filipinos – rooting out corruption rather than furthering it, aiding economic stability for investment and economic development. But Duterte is unlikely to be the person that will make such commitments. More likely, these considerations will again be secondary until a more predictable ally takes office in Manila.

