A year ago, Vladimir Putin stood before the UN general assembly and announced that Russia was launching a military intervention in Syria, and wanted to be part of an international coalition against Isis. Both statements were met with heavy scepticism, with some anticipating that Russia would soon find itself in a Middle East quagmire. Yet on Friday, a year on, Russia and the US announced that they had reached an agreement aimed at paving the way towards a ceasefire in Syria, with a staged process due to start on Monday.

No one can fail to welcome a ceasefire, if it happens. Syria’s five-year civil war has caused an estimated half a million deaths and has displaced more than half of the country’s population of 22 million. Anything that can reduce the level of violence has to be applauded. The US-Russia plan is essentially a bargain. Syrian government forces will stop bombing targets and areas that the US and Russia have agreed to spare, while humanitarian aid will be given safe passage, including to Aleppo. The US will acknowledge Russia as a partner in the fight against Isis. Anti-Assad rebel forces will be required to disentangle themselves from forces formerly associated with al-Qaida.

Scepticism inevitably remains. Last February, another “cessation of hostilities” agreement aroused similar expectations, but was short-lived. And this latest deal has huge gaps: no clear enforcement mechanisms; no provision for the release of prisoners from Syrian jails. It is anyone’s guess whether Russia is willing or able to get the Assad regime to comply; its track record is not good. US leverage over the Syrian opposition is a riddle, too.

But the greatest concern is that the text of the agreement itself has not been publicly released. Its content can only be inferred from Russian and American media statements. This lack of transparency means Syria has once again become an arena of secret diplomacy, this time between the US and Russia. Not surprisingly, the Syrian opposition has reacted with caution (they say they need to study the text). The Assad regime has also kept its silence (although Russia says it has agreed). Yet Syrian government forces intensified their bombing raids as the official ceasefire start neared.

This all has to be seen against the backcloth of a grim last 12 months. Russian bombers and Iranian-controlled soldiers have been decisive in the sieges and starvation of cities, as well as attacks on hospitals, notably in Aleppo. They have helped the Assad regime not only survive but regain some territory.

In many ways, America’s agreement to a coalition with Russia (or at least to jointly coordinated operations) is an acknowledgment that the Kremlin’s build-up has shifted the balance of forces. One wider consequence of the deal is to hand President Putin what he has long sought: a show of strategic parity between Russia and the US. To the domestic audience, this plays powerfully into the Putin narrative of restoring Russian power. Barack Obama gains politically, too. The US president is intent on burnishing his presidential legacy, which Syria’s horrors have long threatened to tarnish. Whether Syrian civilians are now set to benefit is another question.

If this deal brings an end to the indiscriminate airstrikes on populated areas, if it lifts the sieges, and if it is the beginning of a political transition in Syria, it will be a historic achievement. But these are big ifs. Diplomacy has achieved miserably little in the five years of the crisis. Syrians desperately need it to succeed this time. The agreement will only be authoritatively judged by its outcome on the ground, not by the political spin around the summitry in Geneva. To be fully credible the full US-Russia text must surely be published in full. Syrian civilians undoubtedly have an urgent need for safety and protection. But they also have a right to know what the world’s powers have negotiated about their country’s future.