David Cameron’s unexpected decision to quit as an MP, just two months after he stepped down as prime minister, completes one of the most rapid and certainly one of the most spectacular career eclipses in modern British politics. One moment he was riding high, an election winner facing a divided opposition. Now, within no time, he is going altogether. There have been cabinet ministers of all parties who have disappeared with barely a ripple. But not often a prime minister.

What is more, Mr Cameron perished almost entirely by his own hand. Of his recent predecessors in 10 Downing Street, Gordon Brown and John Major left after losing elections they could not avoid, while Margaret Thatcher and Tony Blair were forced out after staying on too long. Only Mr Cameron left because he blew it all by himself, in his case by calling a European referendum he lacked both the popular appeal and the party support to win. He will be for ever remembered as the prime minister whose career was destroyed by Europe. And deservedly so. Now he is turning his back on Westminster at the age of 49.

Yet Mr Cameron does not depart leaving his party with nothing to thank him for. Far from it. Only today the boundary commissions have published proposals for redrawing most constituency boundaries in England and Wales. Mr Cameron’s seat of Witney, where there will now be a byelection, is one of the few that will not be changed at all. Hundreds of others, however, will be, some of them very radically, as part of the reduction in the number of Westminster seats from 650 to 600. And although Mr Cameron leaves politics as a man who failed, in these boundary changes he may bequeath the Conservative party a lasting electoral legacy for which Tories will thank him for decades.

It isn’t just the buildings at Westminster that are no longer fit for purpose, as a report once more confirmed last week. Britain also has far more parliamentarians than we need. But the biggest problem is not the size of the House of Commons. The problem is the size of the House of Lords, whose membership of more than 800 (to which Mr Cameron’s appointments made a large contribution) means the UK has well over 1,400 MPs and peers. Devolution to Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland has meanwhile reduced the importance of Westminster outside England. The case for a properly balanced reform, including a reduction in the overall size of the Westminster parliament, is hard to oppose.

Yet, characteristically, Mr Cameron has set in motion a piecemeal cut in the number of MPs for short-term tactical reasons. His reforms are not balanced or holistic. Instead he responded to public hostility to politics after the expenses scandal, along with English frustrations over the West Lothian question, by cutting the size of the Commons in a way that answers neither problem effectively, while simultaneously entrenching a bias in favour of the Tories and of England.

In some ways there is a case for having more MPs, not fewer. A rising population means that, since the 1950s, the number of voters in an average constituency has increased by a quarter. Through the same period an MP’s workload has become transformationally heavier. Cutting the number of MPs may ensure good headlines for a day. But it reduces the service that MPs can offer their constituents for years to come. It is hard to see in what way this increases trust or respect for representative democracy.

The main concern with the proposals published today is not the redrawing of boundaries. A constituency-based system, which provides an invaluable link between voter and MP, must be redrawn independently and fairly from time to time to adjust to change. This exercise has been independent. But the new boundaries are based on a constituency quota derived from a system of individual electoral registration that leaves 8 million potentially eligible voters off the register altogether. It excludes registrations for the EU referendum, in which 2 million new voters enrolled, in favour of older rolls from 2015. It discriminates against students and those in the inner cities. It is therefore not fair, to Labour in particular.

It is fitting that Mr Cameron has grabbed the headlines by quitting just as the electoral system is being changed in the Tories’ favour. He initiated the boundary changes. He set the rules. His priority was the party interest. He promised fairness but made no effort to deliver it or to carry opinion with him. And he leaves a mess behind him. A better leader would leave with reputation intact. Yet when it came to the test, Mr Cameron failed it.