
This weekend, Ed Balls is to make his debut on Strictly Come Dancing. And if that’s a sentence you never expected to read, it’s sure as hell one I never expected to write.
Yet mildly surreal as the idea of “Disco Balls” foxtrotting while the Labour party burns may be, on reflection it makes a strange kind of sense. Could there be more to this midlife crisis than meets the eye?




Ed Balls reminds us that Labour once mattered | Matthew d’Ancona




The secret of reality telly, as the former shadow chancellor must have learned when he wielded a rather over-competitive spatula on a celebrity Bake Off, is that the baking or the dancing or the singing are only ever incidental to proceedings. It’s really all about (brace yourselves) The Journey that contestants go through; the emotional stories they can tell using the props provided.
To win requires not just competence, but the ability to sweep the audience away on a tide of warm, fuzzy feelings and, frankly, put like that the parallels with contemporary politics could hardly be more obvious.
Emotional intelligence – the ability to understand how other people feel and why they feel it, to connect in a visceral and instinctive way, to express abstract ideas in ways that make human sense – has always mattered in politics. But for all their army of professional tricks, somehow mainstream politicians seem to be losing the knack. It’s the outsiders and the mavericks, the leavers and the chancers, who have learned to play their audiences like violins, while more moderate politicians thrash around uncertainly, struggling to find the right emotional register.
In a climate where – as Leave.EU’s Arron Banks has argued – feelings increasingly trump facts, then politicians will struggle to win even when the facts are on their side, unless they can engage voters at this gut, emotional level. And that’s precisely what many of Balls’s former colleagues have spent the summer not doing.








  

Owen Smith at the Labour leadership hustings in Glasgow. Photograph: Robert Perry/REX/Shutterstock


The fascinating thing about the YouGov poll of the Labour leadership is that, if anything, it shows that Jeremy Corbyn’s supporters are more in touch with reality than is often supposed. Only 56% of Corbyn backers actually think he can win a general election, and four in 10 could not bring themselves to describe him as “competent”.
It’s a timely reminder that many of his supporters are neither blind to their hero’s faults nor ignorant of the electoral maths. And yet nobody else makes them feel quite like he does.
Something about Corbyn himself, or the principles and values he stands for, or the almost fairytale quality of his rise to power – after all these years, against all those odds – or the convergence of all three has hooked them at a deeper level. What matters is the extraordinary emotional reaction he provokes, and calling that a personality cult serves only as a reminder that Labour’s more organised religions are woefully short of personalities and ideas that anyone might feel remotely cult-like about.
The single best question I’ve been asked about the Labour party this year remains the one a rather cross Corbyn-supporting friend put right at the start of this contest: if he’s as hopeless as they say, and the rest of the parliamentary party so superior, where’s their inspiring alternative? How come they can’t even persuade their own party they’re right, when persuading and convincing people is basically their job?
There’s a kernel of harsh truth there that can’t be ducked much longer, as the evidence mounts that Owen Smith may be heading for defeat.
Lips have been loyally bitten, private doubts buried because the stakes are so high – yet from the start it has been painfully clear that Smith makes Ed Miliband look like electoral catnip. How many of Smith’s supporters, if they’re honest, are essentially lying back and thinking of the Labour party, voting more from a sense of duty than unbridled enthusiasm for a man whose chief virtue is not being the other guy?
The contest has undoubtedly exposed some of Corbyn’s weaknesses, as former shadow ministers have lined up to describe near-farcical episodes behind the scenes. But it has also awkwardly exposed the mainstream’s shortcomings – chiefly the absence of a candidate who is better than mediocre, and of a story that grabs people hard and doesn’t let them go.




Strictly hopeful Ed Balls puts on his dancing shoes – in pictures




Meanwhile, the party is showing every sign of entering that classic opposition death spiral where the things that really get its juices flowing – Trident, Tony Blair, furious rows about who exactly betrayed whom – become ever more distant from the preoccupations of ordinary voters and vice versa.
There were moments, watching last week’s leadership debate in Glasgow, that felt more like eavesdropping on a couple of strangers bickering in a restaurant than two would-be prime ministers addressing the nation: while the debate couldn’t feel more visceral inside Labour, from outside it has started to sound oddly tinny and distant, like a radio play chattering away inconsequentially in the background of a busy afternoon. When you don’t feel particularly strongly about the characters, it’s hard to stay interested in the plot.









Ed Balls says being on Strictly Come Dancing is a ‘dream come true’


None of this, of course, is magically solved by Ed Balls busting some of his signature moves – any more than Vince Cable’s turn on Strictly’s Christmas special, at the height of public anger over tuition fees, saved the Lib Dems from a kicking in the polls.
There is perhaps only so much that can be covered up with sequins and hairspray. Whatever publicity George Galloway may have secured for the fledgling Respect party by dressing up as a cat and miaowing on Celebrity Big Brother, meanwhile, almost certainly wasn’t worth the price.
But going on Strictly is only one of dozens of ways of proving that, as Balls said rather plaintively yesterday, “you can do politics and be a human being”; of connecting on a level that has more to do with feelings than facts. His chances of slipping a devastating takedown of this year’s Autumn Statement into casual chitchat with Tess Daly may admittedly be limited, but there’s a time for hitting voters over the head with hard economic theory, and a time for simply earning the right to be heard again, building your way slowly back up to a position of trust.
And if it all seems a bit undignified – well, as Balls found out last year, there’s nothing terribly dignified about losing elections either. Few politicians have more time or reason to reflect on why their party lost an election than those who lose their own seats. Just occasionally, those personally closest to disaster can see what others miss.
Those who really can’t bear the idea of politicians lowering themselves to engage with popular culture should meanwhile perhaps reflect on the fact that Strictly reaches up to 12 million viewers, whereas Newsnight gets half a million on a good night, and save the intellectual snobbery for a time when Labour can once again afford to be picky.

