Westminster is an uncomfortable place for former prime ministers. They can’t win. They are either accused of being the “Incredible Sulk,” as Edward Heath was when he hung around, determined to outstay in the Commons the woman who deposed him as Tory leader in 1975, Margaret Thatcher.

Or they are accused of being absent without leave, as Gordon Brown was after making only rare Commons appearances after Labour lost the 2010 general election. The other option is to get out fast, as Tony Blair did after handing over to Brown in 2007. That has traditionally been seen as bad form because it causes an unnecessary by-election, and looks like the former PM can’t be bothered to go back to being a mere backbencher dealing with constituents’ problems rather than vital matters of state.

It is perhaps no surprise that David Cameron, who once dubbed himself “the heir to Blair”, has opted for the Blair option and is resigning his Witney seat with immediate effect. Although he vowed to stay on as an MP when he quit as PM after the Brexit vote in June, he has had second thoughts after weighing up his options over the summer.

David Cameron steps down as MP

Cameron can – just about – claim there are special circumstances that justify him turning his back on Westminster. His spectacular downfall, just 13 months after winning a general election, was caused by the issue that will dominate British politics for years to come – Brexit. So it would have been very hard for him to engage in that debate.

Second, it would be difficult for him to say much about other matters without being accused of being a backseat driver or bitter man. Today’s media would put every half sentence under the microscope in the hope of getting a “Cameron attacks May” headline.

One factor in Cameron’s decision was surely that Theresa May has defined herself against him, making a deliberate break with the posh boys’ era of a country working for “the privileged few” and halting his policies such as the Hinkley Point nuclear plant and his opposition to new grammar schools. So if he had stayed on as an MP, Cameron would have had to either take a Trappist vow of silence, or would have been accused of disloyalty to May if he had defended his record. He is writing his memoirs and so we will probably have to wait until next year to get his version of the dramatic events which brought him down.

Cameron’s sudden departure will doubtless be seen as in character by his critics. His genuine attempt to make a dignified exit in June was soured by his extravagantly long resignation honours list and the revelation that he had rushed though wage rises and higher-than-usual severance payments for his special advisers. The cost of Cameron’s golden goodbyes has been estimated at £12m.

David Cameron's premiership - in pictures







15 show all David Cameron's premiership - in pictures



























1/15 Britain's Queen Elizabeth II greeting David Cameron at Buckingham Palace for an audience to invite him to be the next Prime Minister on 11 May 2010 PA

2/15 Prime Minister David Cameron and his wife Samantha wave from the steps of Number 10 Downing Street on 11 May 2010 Getty Images

3/15 On 12 May 2010 Prime Minister David Cameron said in a press conference with Lib Dem leader Nick Clegg, who was then deputy PM, they plan to "take Britain in a historic new direction" and Conservative-led coalition government would be united and provide "strong and stable" leadership Rex

4/15 A decade ago, David Cameron visited the Arctic to witness the effects of climate change. However since coming to power in 2010, his government has gradually dropped down a succession of green policies

5/15 Prime Minister David cameron told the then New York mayor Michael Bloomberg, the Queen had “purred down the line” after he told her Scotland had voted against independence in September 2014. He was forced to apologise for breaking constitutional convention Getty Images

6/15 Britain's Prime Minister David Cameron greeted soldiers working on flood relief in York city centre after the river Ouse burst its banks, in northern England in December 2015 REUTERS

7/15 Claims that David Cameron performed an obscene act with a dead pig and smoked cannabis during his studies at Oxford University spread around the world in September 2015. The extraordinary allegations were made in an unauthorised biography of the Prime Minister written by Lord Ashcroft David Hartley/REX Shutterstock

8/15 In 2016, Mr Cameron was caught up in a worldwide scandal dubbed the “Panama papers” Reuters

9/15 Prime minister David Cameron and his wife Samantha with seven week old Regan as they meet her parents, first time home buyers Robert Arron and Kelly Jeffers at the Heritage Brook housing development in Chorley, Lancashire. David Cameron has joked that he wants "another baby" and said that he feels a "bit broody" every time he sees a newborn on the campaign trail

10/15 Prime Minister David Cameron was criticised for branding refugees in the Calais ‘jungle’ camp as a “bunch of migrants” in January 2016 after thousands of refugees died in their attempt to cross the Mediterranean in 2015 Sky News

11/15 Britain's Prime Minister David Cameron speaks with European Commission President Jean-Claude Juncker during an EU summit meeting on 17 March 2016 at the European Union council in Brussels. Cameron was in Brussels to renegotiate deal of UK membership with other European leaders. The deal, sealed after hours of haggling at a marathon summit, paved the way for a referendum on whether Britain will stay in the EU AFP/Getty Images

12/15 President Barack Obama shakes hands with British Prime Minister David Cameron at a meeting at 10 Downing Street in London on 22 April 2016. The President and his wife visited 10 Downing Street where he joined press conference with British Prime Minister David Cameron and made his case for the UK to remain inside the European Union Getty Images

13/15 After David returned from Brussels claiming victory in his renegotiation with European leaders, Boris Johnson announced that he will not support the Remain campaign. The prime minister said publicly he was "disappointed but Boris remains a friend" PA

14/15 Prime Minister David Cameron makes a joint appearance with Mayor of London Sadiq Khan as they launch the Britain Stronger in Europe guarantee card at Roehampton University on 20 May 2016 in London. The 'guarantee card' lists five pledges should Britain remain in the EU, including the protection of workers' rights, full access to the single market and stability for Britain

15/15 Britain's Prime Minister David Cameron speaks outside 10 Downing Street on 24 June 2016. Cameron announced his resignation after Britain voted to leave the European Union after a bitterly divisive referendum campaign AP

His honours list has been seen as him putting up two fingers to the political world. It has played badly even in Conservative circles, where his decision to hand peerages to key aides has fuelled demands for the bloated 800-strong House of Lords to be cut down in size. There is growing pressure for the number of peers to be no higher than the number of MPs, which under boundary changes will fall from 650 to 600 by 2020. If a slimline Lords is a Cameron legacy, it will be an accidental one.

Unfortunately for Cameron, his legacy will be as the man who gambled on an unnecessary referendum and took the country out of the EU by accident. It could get even worse if Scotland votes to leave the UK.

However, there is still time for Cameron to learn a lesson from the man he still calls “the master”. Blair’s reputation was sullied not just by the Iraq War but by what appeared to be his ruthless money-making machine after leaving office. Cameron will certainly want to earn a good living – and will be able to. But, as Brown has shown, there is a better way of doing that than Blair has chosen.