
Last night, a smoking convoy of trucks laden with desperately needed food and humanitarian aid symbolised the end of the ceasefire in Syria. The cessation of hostilities lasted barely a week. The agreement brokered by the US and Russia seemed like a positive step, coming hard on the heels of the publication of a transition plan from the opposition Syrian High Negotiation Committee (HNC) just a few weeks ago in London. But in the callous targeting of civilian aid – a war crime if it is shown to be deliberate – the Syrian regime has shown that it is not interested in peace, only suffering.




US blames Russia after UN aid convoy in Syria targeted by air attack




This is not the only war crime committed by Bashar al-Assad and his allies. A few weeks ago, a report from Human Rights Watch revealed that incendiary weapons similar to napalm were being dropped on civilians in the opposition-held areas of Aleppo and Idlib. Napalm. It sounds like a weapon from another age, but this is the Middle East in the 21st century and it is on fire.
We have also seen the re-emergence of chlorine gas as a weapon with barrels of the lethal toxin dropped on densely populated civilian areas. The gas disperses quickly and fills the lungs of people who inhale it with fluid until they choke. Its availability makes it easy to mass produce and almost impossible to trace. As a result, chemical weapons experts are warning of the risk of “normalising” chemical weapons after a sustained international effort to keep them beyond the pale. Meanwhile Syrians on the ground talk of hearing the sound of helicopters and praying they are just carrying explosives and nothing worse.









Aftermath of airstrike on Syrian aid convoy – video


It is important to be clear not just about what is happening in Syria, but also who is to blame. As a Labour MP who voted for airstrikes against Islamic State last year, whenever I write about Syria I see a similar response. I am told that it is my fault, I voted for “bombing”, the blood of the dead of Aleppo is on my hands. But this could not be further from the truth. British airstrikes are targeted at Isis and are hundreds of miles from Aleppo where the worst suffering is occurring. The vast majority of civilian casualties, including those in the famous images, are victims of Assad’s aggression against his own people, sparked by the democratic uprising of the Arab spring. Surely even those whose political activism is mainly commenting on Facebook and Twitter can recall that, in 2013, the House of Commons had a full debate on British involvement in possible action against Assad. Labour did not support David Cameron, and our country has taken no overt military steps to respond to Assad’s brutality.
In fact, like many in our country, I wrestle with what more we could have done to stop Assad. The latest stories of life and death in Aleppo drive me mad with worry. If I am asked (as I am sure all MPs are, now that Twitter dominates debate), “how do you sleep?”, the honest answer is: not well. Not well at all.

Syria airstrike map

So what can be done? With bombs raining down on the people of eastern Aleppo as we speak, it is urgent that the ceasefire is salvaged if possible. Theresa May is at the UN in New York and she should be calling for an urgent meeting of the UN security council (UNSC) to bring the Russians to the table and do everything to get a deal. The UK should also be volunteering to take the lead on tracking aircraft over Syria, so that there is absolute clarity about who is responsible for these crimes.
In the longer term, protection of civilians from aerial bombardment, along with the destruction of chemical weapons stockpiles, must be the aim. There is a legal precedent in Kosovo for the establishment of a no-fly zone without UNSC backing and this option should not be off the table if it can be shown to be the most effective way of protecting civilians. But even failing this there are things we can do. We can push for bigger windows to get humanitarian aid into the worst-hit areas. We can get support to the heroic White Helmets, the Syrian volunteers who risk their lives to save as many people as they can from the death raining down on them. We can offer clear support to the credible, inclusive plans the Syrian opposition are putting forward.
Last week I was elected co-chair of the Friends of Syria group in parliament, taking up the role held by my friend Jo Cox. She would have known what was needed, what to argue for. Most of all I think she would have said to help the refugees fleeing Syria, not just 20,000 by 2020 but many more, much more quickly. Peace in Syria may seem out of reach for now, but there are things that can be done, we must not waste time to bring relief to those who desperately need it.

