
When I was 10 years old, I loved Charlie’s Angels, Lynda Carter as Wonder Woman and the Madeleine L’Engle novel A Wrinkle in Time. On Thursday night, when Chelsea Clinton mentioned it in her speech at the 2016 Democratic National Convention, I pumped my fist in the air and cheered before I even realized what I was doing.
The book was first recommended to me by my elementary school librarian. “It won the Newbery Award,” she told me. “I think you’ll like it.”
I didn’t just like it, I loved it. The story of plain, bespectacled Meg Murry and her courageous quest to save her scientist father – and, almost coincidentally, the world – wasn’t like any book I’d ever read before. I read it through in two days and then a month later, I read it again. 




Chelsea Clinton, in spotlight she once shunned, speaks of Hillary the mother




I now realize in hindsight that A Wrinkle in Time may have been my first feminist text and that Meg Murry was an avatar for almost all of the strong, intelligent, independent female friends I would go on to have girl-crushes on in later life. 
It’s been said that well-behaved women rarely make history. Meg wasn’t like any heroine I’d ever read about before. She wasn’t perfectly pretty and demure like Nancy Drew. In fact, she called herself “a monster”.
“She looked at herself in the wardrobe mirror and made a horrible face, baring a mouthful of teeth covered with braces,” says the narrator in chapter one. “Automatically she pushed her glasses into position, ran her fingers through her mouse-brown hair, so that it stood wildly on end, and let out a sigh almost as noisy as the wind.”
Meg described herself as a misfit, at odds with other kids, teachers and even her own boring “normal” twin brothers, Sandy and Dennys, who never seem to act up or step out of line. 
Meg was flawed and human, not like the square-jawed heroes of the Heinlein and Asimov-penned hardware fiction I had read up to that point. In the end, it is her flaws that save her on the nightmarish, conformist planet of Camazotz, where everyone acts the same, dresses the same and is controlled by an all-powerful mind force known as IT.
When preparing for battle against IT, Mrs Whatsit gives Meg the weapon she needs to survive in the form of her “faults”.
“My faults!” Meg replies, incredulous. “But I’m always trying to get rid of my faults!” 
“Yes,” Mrs Whatsit says. “However, I think you’ll find they’ll come in very handy on Camazotz.”
Meg’s inability to conform, to fit in and fall in line is what saves her in a world full of rigid automatons – that, and her ability to love. 
Whether L’Engle intended it or not, A Wrinkle in Time was a powerful message for me to stay true to myself, to embrace the things that made me different and to love fierce, strong-minded women. As I grew up, realized I was gay and made my way in the world, those were the best friends and allies I could ever ask for.
Since Chelsea Clinton mentioned it as her favorite childhood book on Thursday, Wrinkle has shot to the top of the bestseller lists. It makes me excited to think of all the young minds who will embark on its journey, getting sneakily introduced to quantum physics and cellular biology along the way.
Jill Filipovic wrote in Cosmopolitan magazine that the nomination of Hillary Clinton for president was a victory for “smart girls”. I hope Clinton’s nomination and A Wrinkle in Time will both serve as inspiration for a new generation of smart, rebel girls to embrace their braininess and individuality, and for the boys, too, gay and otherwise, who love them.

