
In an industry that swaggers with bombast and fury, the continuing presence of BBC Alba in Scotland’s television firmament is a delight. The Gaelic-medium station, which launched eight years ago, often reaches out to the rest of us and when you lift the silken veil and take a peek from time to time you are never disappointed.
It sits bashfully between ITV2 and STV Glasgow and just a few places along from the big channels. On Thursday night, forsaking all others and dodging the Redneck Zone (though I do have a soft spot for Ice Truckers USA) I watched a splendid documentary on the life of Eva Braun, Hitler’s mistress, which also chronicled the final descent into physical and mental decay of the FÜhrer and in which it was revealed that Fraulein Braun doted on her two Scots terriers. The programme appeared to have been made by BBC Alba itself as the commentary was in Gaelic with English subtitles. It was the best thing I’ve watched all week.
Its coverage of football, out with the Old Firm, is both refreshing and ground-breaking. It dispenses with the tired, decades-old format, favoured by the BBC, of spoiling the half-time interval with worthless, predictable and semi-literate nonsense by former footballers. Instead, there are mini-documentaries behind the scenes at the clubs. It is sharp and innovative, unlike the coverage on BBC Scotland.
BBC Alba has reached a watershed in its existence when, despite its success, it is at a point where the corporation chiefs in London must decide if it will assist further in its development for a relatively modest outlay. The station, by any of the instruments used to measure such things, has been an outstanding success. Seven out of 10 Gaelic speakers in Scotland watch BBC Alba every week, which is the same reach that BBC1 enjoys nationally. Astonishingly, 15% of all viewers in Scotland have a look at least once every week. Soon though, the station’s health will be threatened because it is running out of the oxygen of new programmes. Of its current output, 74% consists of repeats, a figure that, no matter how much goodwill is extended to the station, is unsustainable in the long term.
As the BBC finalises its charter renewal offering, BBC Alba is asking London to commit to 10 hours of new programming per week. The current level stands at 4.2 hours. It is not an unreasonable request and does not affect BBC Scotland’s struggles for more consideration from London. A 10-hour new programme commitment from London would bring BBC Alba into line with the weekly quotient granted to S4C, the Welsh language public service television station for the past 30 years. BBC Alba currently gets 3p of the £12.13 monthly licence fee, yet its Welsh Language equivalent gets 10 times that sum.




BBC to launch online TV channel for Scotland




Both the Scottish and UK governments have commended Alba for its excellence and for having surpassed all the targets that it has ever been set since its inception eight years ago. The BBC Trust annual review report and Westminster’s culture, media and sport committee have both expressed support.
The station also has a fruitful relationship with BBC Scotland. On more than one occasion I’ve heard a BBC producer at Pacific Quay say: “I wish we’d thought of that” in response to another good documentary offering from its wee Gaelic sibling.
The future of BBC Alba is bound up with ideas of cultural diversity in modern Scotland. Its fate will form part of what we would like our Scotland to look like. Astonishingly, in this country there are still voices raised in exasperation whenever there is talk of public funding for the Gaelic language. It was a shrill cry heard occasionally on the Unionist side of our great constitutional debate. “Why must we bother about a language spoken by only 60,000 people?” It exhibits the same absence of imagination that is suspicious of anything that isn’t uniform or safely ordered by Control Centre.
It also betrays a shocking ignorance of what the Gaelic society and history have added to Scotland’s cultural exchequer.




 

Unlike Scotland, Ireland and Wales preserve and nourish their ancient tongues as a rare and delicate gift




 

As a nation, Scotland has neglected its Gaelic culture and language; allowing it to wither from lack of funding at a time when Ireland and Wales, by comparison, are eager to preserve and nourish their ancient tongues, each in the knowledge that they have been bequeathed a rare and delicate gift. In parts of civic Scotland, a Roundhead attitude persists over funding for Gaelic culture that dictates that if it doesn’t seem to have a significant cost benefit then it’s not worth pursuing.
Yet BBC Alba has been at the centre of a grassroots cultural renaissance in the Highlands and Islands and beyond that is sparking employment opportunities in the creative industries. During 2015-16, BBC Alba commissioned 454 hours of content from 26 Scottish production companies. MG Alba, which operates BBC Alba, estimates that more than 300 jobs are driven by its work, of which 40% are in the Highlands and Islands, a region that has suffered from depopulation as generations of young people migrate. This trend is beginning to be halted and, in places, reversed and BBC Alba is at the heart of the reawakening.
Recent documentaries on Jock Stein and Jim Baxter and one on Hamish Henderson, the Scottish poet and songwriter, have equalled the best of anything the national broadcaster has offered. It also covers those smaller arts and music festivals deemed not to be sufficiently large for the big broadcaster. In this way, it stimulates interest and creativity in the arts in Scotland’s more remote areas, which just happen to cover most of our landmass. In particular, the runaway success of the Gaelic drama Bannan has boosted the economy of the Highlands and Islands. Already, it is estimated that the drama provides 14 full-time jobs alone on the island of Skye.
BBC Alba is not simply showcasing the Gaelic language – it is at the centre of a quiet cultural reseeding of an area that Lowland Scotland has long ignored. Now is the time to let BBC Alba spread its wings a little further.

