
Maybe I feel like August won’t let go of me, but maybe I don’t want to let go of August, the Christmas of summer, with its trips to the seashore and ice-cream and deep sighs of nostalgia. I know I will have to do it. August and I need to break up, but it’s hard.
I still need to put my suitcase from summer holidays away, which I don’t want to do because it puts a final stamp on the season, even though the truth about vacations is that the minute they end it almost feels like they never happened.
Unpacking it at last, I find a pebble. I try not to collect things any more, but I can’t walk away from the ocean without something in my hand, knowing that away from the water and sky, no longer warmed by the sun or a slatey-blue color, it’s a mere rock that looks at me blankly, like: “You should know better by now.”




New York City's summer is vile. But you won't find me anywhere else | Samantha Gillison




The shadows begin to fall earlier and earlier, but it’s still hot. Walking my shaggy, pant-y dogs at night, I feel a stirring of wanting to wear a sweater, but I don’t, since it’s still about 80F. I’ve finally got my summer garb sorted out, but the florals and seersuckers and espadrilles are beginning to look droopy, a little sad. And it’s still August, somehow.
I keep looking at the calendar hoping to see the month end – let’s just start sweater and pumpkin season already – but August does not go quickly. Its days stretch out before me, shorter than July’s but still long enough to make me question why, if life is temporary, August just keeps going. 
I suspect that the world wants to make me cry, to look mortality hard in the face, but then I think that if the world were meddling in human affairs, it would have a lot better things to do that troll me for fun. Transitions are always difficult, and it’s hard to be suspended, liminal, between trapezes. I can’t imagine grabbing the next one but it will happen. 
Recently I was standing in line at the store and blankly regarding the Reese’s peanut butter pumpkins that have appeared next to the cash register, unable to even rouse the usual “peanut butter pumpkins in August?” outrage in my hot, tired brain.
 My year has two major sections: socks or no socks. Once the heat breaks and it cools off a bit, I’ll be back in socks. I’ll plug in my full-spectrum light, and at night I’ll dream new dreams. I don’t sleep well during the summer, but fall and winter are prime sleeping time. The pebble will return to the sea of long, dark nights. And next year, blinking in the pale light of spring, no-socks season will begin again.
I was wearing my usual sandals, and I heard the the kid in front of me, who seemed like one of those sitcom-odd types, say to the cashier: “I mean, women buy all these nice sandals just for the summer,” gesturing at my feet. He was wearing large, blocky sneakers redolent of a mother’s concern for his feet getting mangled in variety of ways. “But summer’s almost over,” he sighed, the school year in his sights; an actual night’s sleep in mine. 
The cashier and I said in unison: “There’s always next year.”

