
When his daughter Shelley was born with Down’s syndrome, Lord Rix was told by a doctor to “put her away in a home, forget about her and start again”. All I could think when I heard this was: what if the doctor had said that about me, or about my friends who have a learning disability?
The sad truth is that many doctors still say “sorry” when telling parents that their child may have a learning disability. Rix took a stand against these attitudes, and spent his life trying to make sure children with a learning disability are given the best chances.


I’m in my mid-30s, and have a learning disability. Throughout my life I’ve always heard “you can’t do this” and “why would you bother trying that?” But I’ve managed to challenge all of these attitudes. I have a job, I’m married and I get to do things my teachers said I shouldn’t even dream of. I don’t think any of this would have been possible without Rix.
When my dad told me that the president of Mencap, the charity I was going to work for, was famous as an actor in farces and for dropping his trousers on national TV, I was a bit confused. For me, having a learning disability is serious, and we need serious people to help break down all the barriers that have led people to be excluded from society.
I didn’t know at the time about Shelley, or that Rix was really the first super-parent-campaigner for people with a learning disability. There are many parents who have become famous campaigners now, including Hayley Goleniowska, Caroline White and Tom Bachofner. But Rix was one of the first to speak out in public about the emotions parents have when they are told their child will have a learning disability. He fought his whole adult life for people to realise that children with a learning disability can have lives that are just as rewarding and exciting as anyone else’s.




 

I was lucky enough to meet Lord Rix, and when he spoke, everyone in the room would listen




 

I was lucky enough to meet him, and he was different to most other people I’ve encountered in the charity world. When he spoke, everyone in the room would listen. But the best thing for me was that he would always put people with a learning disability first. Other people in his worlds – acting and politics – may have felt uncomfortable around people like me, but he wasn’t, and he used this to change their attitudes and break down the fear and awkwardness people sometimes feel when talking to those with a learning disability.
I remember being at an event where he was asked late on to give a speech in front of all these senior officials of a credit card company. He said, “No, I want someone with a learning disability to do it.” He turned to me and asked me to give a speech – to talk about my experiences of learning disability in front of all these important people. At the end, many came and congratulated me and I could tell the speech had made a real impact. Since then, I’ve given speeches in parliament, to TV chief executives and to celebrities, too. Without Rix, I’d never have had the confidence to speak up and make sure my voice was being heard.
His impact went much further than the people he met. There are many celebrities who have done great things for charity and made the world a better place. But Rix did this as a fundraiser, a campaigning parent and more recently in the House of Lords. He campaigned well into his 90s and changed laws that have helped protect people with a learning disability, and ensure that they are listened to, both in society in general and in politics specifically.








  

Ciara Lawrence and Lord Rix (second right) in conversation with Vince Cable. Photograph: Ciara Lawrence


I know Rix would say there’s still so much more to do. Every year, 1,200 people with a learning disability die avoidably in our NHS; people are still being sent to institutions like Winterbourne View where they are at risk of abuse and neglect; just 6% of those known to social services have a paid job; hate crimes are causing many to live in fear; and cuts to welfare and social care are leaving many people isolated in their own homes and excluded from society. We have come so far; but I know as someone with a learning disability, and as a campaigner, that if you are born with a learning disability you still face a life full of inequality. Rix’s great achievement was to help us in the fight against this imbalance. He gave people with a learning disability a platform, and helped us to achieve greater access to parliament.
Rix’s death has left a huge hole in my life, and in many other people’s. But I know for a fact that the 1.4 million people with a learning disability in the UK have a far brighter future because of him, and he has inspired hundreds of parents and people with a learning disability to become campaigners, to fill the hole he’s left behind.

