
Last week, in a largely futile attempt to actually do some work, I installed a browser extension that blocked pretty much any website I could possibly distract myself with. Twitter: gone. Facebook: gone. Even my emails, which I obsessively tend to in order to feel moderately productive, were off limits for an hour.
Having found new and imaginative ways to waste my own time, what surprised me most was not how much more work I did, but the sheer frequency with which I attempted to access the internet. I’d incessantly tap “twitter.com” into the address bar, somehow immediately forgetting it was blocked. I’d click on my still-open Facebook tab to check my feed before remembering there was no point. Every time I finished a sentence I’d flit away from my work again, trying to exchange 10 seconds of productivity for 10 minutes of distraction. I knew I spent a lot of time online – but not this much.




Five ways to curb your internet use and get your life back | Rhiannon Lucy Cosslett




It turns out I’m not the only one who has what could probably be regarded as a mild internet addiction. A new study from Ofcom has found that on average, UK adults spend 25 hours a week online – a pretty sharp increase from the nine hours we spent on the internet back in 2005. Since then, the lines between “real life” and “online” have become increasingly blurred, and IRL (in real life) has started to sound as much of an outdated relic as ASL?, AFK or ROFLMAO.
This ubiquity is getting to us. According to the study, 59% of people feel they’re “hooked” to their devices. 48% said they neglected housework because they spent too much time online; 47% missed out on sleep. Around 30% said their friendships and relationships had suffered because of their internet use. This has led to an increase in what Ofcom have termed “digital detoxes”, with 15 million people seeking “a period of time offline” in order to break their habit.
This isn’t just a social issue: internet addiction can have an impact on our brains and mental health as well as our relationships and our sleep patterns. Some studies have suggested that the same neurobiological processes present in gambling and drug addiction may also be linked to internet addiction; pilot studies have been run to identify the role of dopamine in internet addiction; and in 2009 a study claimed that internet addiction is associated with “structural and functional changes in brain regions involving emotional processing, executive attention, decision making and cognitive control”. The American writer Nicholas Carr has even said that the internet impacts our creative capacities.
I know from my own experience how overuse of the internet affects mental health. When I’m having a major episode of depression I spend hours online, scrolling blankly through articles and newsfeeds and timelines as a way of distracting myself, using Twitter as a shield to avoid face-to-face interaction. Everything I need is online. I can order food rather than leaving the house, I can talk to strangers instead of seeing friends to fulfil my severely diminished social drive. It may seem like the perfect solution, but can often serve to isolate one even further.




Turning off technology is about mental wellbeing – not being a hermit




It is a problem of which the mental health charity Mind is aware. Triggering websites or damaging online relationships can exacerbate or perpetuate existing problems. The charity, like Ofcom, also recommend that users take a break from the internet when it has “stopped being a positive thing” or is fostering unhealthy feelings, thoughts or behaviours.
If you take all this at face value, logging off seems like a good idea. Scaremongering would be easy, the nebulous spectre of ill-health being used as a tool to undermine those who spend a lot of time online (namely young people). But the internet is also an extremely powerful tool for good, especially for the mind. Though I can often get sucked in, it can also act as a lifeline in times of severe distress, providing comfort, distraction and sometimes even emergency support.
The problem is that the internet is so omnipresent that we forget or even preclude ourselves from experiencing these positive elements. Like many young people, my online life is tightly intertwined with my offline one: I met most of my friends online, I use Twitter to promote my work, I consume almost all of my media, including books, via a smartphone or tablet. It’s so normal that I barely register the fact that there’s a difference between the two.
In some cases, though, there is. Texting someone when I’m feeling depressed just doesn’t have the same impact as a real-life conversation, and shutting myself inside a wall entirely made of snarky tweets actively prevents me from seeking genuine help.
It might sound boring, but in the end, it’s a matter of balance. It’s not a matter of giving up Facebook for weeks at a time or ignoring rafts of emails. Rather, being mindful of the way we use the internet, and the negative impact that it can have on us, may provide a better solution than switching off completely.

