
The number of people on zero-hours contracts in the UK is climbing towards a million. To the unions, as TUC general secretary Frances O’Grady put it, they’re simply “an easy way for bosses to employ staff on the cheap”. That may be true. And when zero-hours contracts are being used by employers routinely, as they were at Sports Direct, it’s certainly true.
Len McCluskey, general secretary of Unite, points out that: “Since [the Tories] unleashed austerity on working people in 2010, insecure, poorly rewarded work has risen threefold.” That is indeed an abject observation. Yet the unions’ unrelenting narrative of passive victimhood gets a lot of people’s backs up.




Say hello to zero hours, kiss goodbye to workers' rights | Tanya Gold




It’s true that pretty much all new employment during this period has been self-employment, much of it reluctant. But it’s also true that many people like being their own boss, and just don’t recognise the binary struggle between bosses and workers as relevant to their lives. They like being both.
Unions aren’t there to thwart what employers want. They exist to represent workers, and some workers are on zero-hours contracts because they want to be. Not everyone likes it. But the world of work and earnings has changed, and is still changing. By couching their arguments constantly in terms of resentment and resistance, the unions – and the Labour party – run the risk of encouraging a nostalgic passivity that could leave stranded the very people they profess to want to help.
The left tends to romanticise the idea of the “job for life”, forgetting that for a lot of people the reality was decade after decade of turning up like clockwork to do work they hated, and longing for retirement. This, too, is miserable, even if your pay is fair. Job security can be a kind of burden, a brake on the nurturing of hopes and the following of dreams.
Sometimes, the left ignores positive aspects of an ideology they’re broadly against. Conservative rhetoric about entrepreneurship and flexibility, when it’s routinely railed against by the left, alienates people who passionately want social justice and want to carry on teaching a few yoga classes, doing up bits of furniture and selling them on the internet, running a few food stalls at a few festivals, sleeping in with the kids when they get an Airbnb client, slowly working through a correspondence course and keeping it all going with a zero-hours contract.
They are mostly taken up by women, and two thirds of people on zero-hours contracts say they don’t want more hours than they have already. Maybe, just maybe, people should be encouraged to believe that landing a steady job with a benign employer isn’t always the best they can hope for in life, and that having as many irons in the fire as they can might be much better for the old work-life balance.
One of the really harsh lessons of deindustrialisation was the folly of economic monoculture. So many towns and cities that relied on just one thing – one thing that seemed permanent but proved not to be – are still now unemployment blackspots. Sure, it was cruel, telling whole communities brought up to believe they would have a certain kind of life that now they had to get on their bikes, adapt, change. Maybe, even now, capitulating to that feels too much like the enemy won. But sometimes you have to beat the enemy on its own ground.
There are professions that need so much skill, expertise and experience that it’s sensible to build a career around them. But a lot of work isn’t like that. One of the awful things about the emphasis on kids being expected to have a career plan at 14, coupled with the etiolation of adult education, is that the fable of the job for life still pertains.
Likewise, some work is so demanding that people just burn out. Work like that needs to be a part of professional life, not all of it. There are many advantages to casting working life as a portfolio of activities, rather than a single, all-important bet. There are opportunities as well as problems in today’s technologically sophisticated world, yet again and again we somehow allow fear to overwhelm hope.
By developing new ideas, instead of constantly harking back to a past that failed – as Theresa May is doing with grammar schools and Jeremy Corbyn with nationalisation – there is an enormous opportunity to build a happier, more resilient society. The challenges are huge. There’s no denying that. But surely it has to start with seeking out the positive aspects of where we all are now, and seeing how well that can be adapted to serve those who need support? Instead, all that appears to be on offer is an attempt to recapture halcyon days that didn’t always, by any means, seem terribly halcyon at the time.

