
Murray Holm knows what it’s like to be unemployed. The longtime Tafe teacher found himself suddenly redundant after Campbell Newman’s Queensland government took a razor to his sector back in 2014.
Up in Townsville, the experienced, qualified Holm didn’t hold out much hope of finding another job. The northern city has become the “unemployment capital of Australia”, with a rate that hit 14.8% in June, and Holm’s 60s were approaching. He found himself dependent on his partner, a health worker, who was also fearing for her job in an atmosphere of cuts.
Holm spent 18 months unemployed – a period he says damaged his mental health. “You go out every day and there’s nothing there, so it gets to the stage where you think ‘Why go out? Why bother even looking anymore?’”.




On political donations, Canberra is sleepwalking into its own integrity crisis | Katharine Murphy




His fortunes changed with the election of Queensland’s Palaczszuk government. He didn’t get his Tafe job back, but a state government initiative recruited him into a support role in a dedicated service for Townsville’s unemployed youth. For them, the local unemployment rate is even more dire at over 20%. For Indigenous youth, it’s hitting 30%.
Holm suspects it may be even higher than that – a third of his clients aren’t counted in the rate because they’re ineligible for Newstart. He knows from his own experience that “the jobs aren’t there”, and that local unemployment has had a cascading effect. “People don’t go out as much as they used to, they don’t spend money,” he says, “it’s hard for businesses to take on new staff.”
 No one can seriously argue that unemployment in a places like Townsville – or South Australia, western Tasmania, the NSW central and south coasts or anywhere unemployment is hitting double figures – results from a coincidental mass of individual lack of gumption, yet it’s kids like the ones Murray Holm supports that were denounced last week by the treasurer, Scott Morrison, as the “taxed nots”. The implication is that those dependent on Newstart’s rate of around $13,720 a year are merely bludging off other taxpayers, and at the expense of the budget’s bottom line.
Oxfam condemned this as demonisation, and yet it’s a principle informing a raft of measures affecting the unemployed and other welfare recipients the Coalition is currently trying to get through parliament. The removal of compensation for the repealed carbon tax and the abolition of an income support bonus payment will hit the unemployed for up to $9.80 a week – a devastating penalty for those already living $189.71 below the Henderson poverty line. Peter Martin in Fairfax claims it is “a real cut to the incomes of unemployed Australians, the first ever.” 
It’s already hard enough. At 25, Jane Lancaster is one of Morrison’s “taxed-nots” from Nowra on the NSW south coast. She’s been unemployed since last November. Since then, she’s completed a certificate III to qualify her to work in aged care, but while that sector is growing, Lancaster’s job opportunities are not. 
“It’s not as though I’m not looking,” she told me. “I get on the internet and throw out as many resumes as I can. I’ve even applied to work at McDonald’s but maybe I’m too old.” At 25? Lancaster can only guess that, “It’s easier to hire younger kids because they don’t expect a lot of money.” For her, a mere $9 “would be a huge amount” to lose, especially when circumstances are already punishing. “I’ve had a month where I just lived on noodles,” she says. There have been times she’s had to choose between feeding herself, or the dog.




Cory Bernardi is more dangerous than One Nation – his party is in power




Owen Bennett, from the Australian Unemployed Workers’ Union, claims it gets a lot worse than that. In a recent call out by the union that asked, “What do you go without on Newstart?”, the common themes were: going without food, avoiding medical treatment and living in precarious accommodation. Bennett explains that “housing takes up 60-70% of a Newstart cheque, and you have to penny pinch for the rest. The only way you can really survive is in shared housing.”
Pressurised living arrangements exacerbate other problems. The negative impact of unemployment on mental health is well understood , but precarious accommodation also creates vulnerabilities to domestic violence and other forms of abuse. 
Among Morrison’s measures, Bennett draws attention to another $2bn of broader social security cuts the treasurer has pledged. “It’s based on more aggressive debt recovery tactics,” says Bennett of plans to enforce stricter penalties for missed appointments, fare evasion, hire-purchases and loan repayments. 
“There are so many attacks. It’s counterintuitive – every percentage of unemployment that exists decreases the income of the government in tax revenue, and money circulating in the economy. It’s why the Business Council is finally saying it’s too low. Conservative groups are saying it’s too low.”
But the government isn’t saying it’s too low, and they’re hoping to wedge Labor into a false narrative of “fiscal responsibility” to join them – all the while the fiscal irresponsibility of the unemployment crisis devastates communities like Townsville, and unjustly injures struggling individuals everywhere.





Photograph: @murraywho52/Twitter


That’s why the graduates of Murray Holm’s program were motivated to make signs and stake out a stretch of Townsville freeway this week, making a visual political demand for the right to become taxpayers through the provision of paid work. It’s why Owen Bennett is reaching out to people to organise the unemployed in a nationwide organisation, and why in April Jade Lancaster hitched a ride to Canberra to speak at a protest on the Parliament House lawn demanding real government action on jobs. 
 Many political commentators have suggested that the downfall of Tony Abbott was rooted in the perceived unfairness of his welfare-bashing budget of 2014. Labor – yet to declare its hand on these latest cuts – would be wise to analyse both Abbott’s lesson and the paradox of gaining more of the centre every time they differentiate themselves from the Liberals by moving left. 
There’s not just a moral imperative for Labor to protect the unemployed from exploitation. With record votes travelling to minor parties, the government on a knife edge, and a sea of marginal seats with employment problems up for grabs, there’s also a pragmatic one.

