The Sun receives a lot of flak, but one thing you can’t say is that it doesn’t care about women’s health. Right now it is particularly worried about Lily Allen, raising concerns over the singer’s “dramatic collapse” at Notting Hill Carnival over the weekend.

In “disturbing scenes”, the mum-of-two was seen vomiting before being rescued by her boyfriend. In a quest to know the truth about Lily’s mysterious health condition, the tabloid meticulously logs her “marathon booze session” apparently fuelled by cans of Strongbow cider, Red Stripe, Carlsberg, and homemade rum punch as well as her “suspicious cigarette” – replete with a close-up of said cigarette, so that readers could use their own sleuthing skills to get to the bottom of what was so suspicious about it.

Getting to the bottom of the issue, the newspaper reported that the event hinted at “the deep pain of her marriage split.” Because, of course, you know what drives women to the edge? Men.

At a time like this, I’m glad I never reached enough notoriety to have my Carnival goings-on exposed with a zoom lens. I can only imagine the copy: “Distressing scenes of a drunken Scouser wining against fences erected to protect W11 properties from revellers. The 5ft-3-inches blonde was later spotted supping on a bottle of Jamaican Ginger Beer. We cannot confirm, but a source said that the soft drink may have been used as a mixer for rum. The 27-year-old was later seen sitting on the pavement among discarded jerk chicken takeaway containers, drinking two Red Stripes and four Peronis, before stumbling in the direction of Kensal Rise. We seriously fear for her health and wellbeing.”

Notting Hill Carnival celebrates its 50th anniversary

Personally, I would have been more worried about Lily Allen’s health had she not enjoyed the bacchanal. It is the one time of year Londoners are given free rein to collectively free themselves of the rigid keep-on-the-left-hand-side-of-the-escalator social norms that hold the city together. “J’ouvert”, the name given to the opening event of the Carnival, is a perfect example of this, as groups of dancers have flour, paint, and gross viscous chocolate sauce thrown over them. Even the police offers have been known to be possessed by the spirit of Soca, although part of me does think this might be a London Metropolitan Police public relations operation.

Rather than policing the behaviour of a woman enjoying herself in the sunshine, we should celebrate Lily Allen. Here is a woman who has not let being a mum get in the way of having fun. Lily Allen, you are my motherhood goals. And the rest of Twitter agrees: “@lilyallen all of us need a blow out at some point, mother or not” and “@lilyallen yes you're a mum but you're also an individual. You're allowed to let loose. Your kids were safe elsewhere. Bloody bullies” were among the positive comments left after tabloids descended upon her rare moment of carefree partying with shouts of judgement and faux-concern.

UK news in pictures







29 show all UK news in pictures























































1/29 9 November 2016 Dr. Christopher Moran, Chairman Co-operation Ireland, Arlene Foster, First Minister of Northern Ireland, Queen Elizabeth II, Martin McGuinness, Deputy First Minister of Northern Ireland and Frances Fitzgerald, Minister of Justice and Equality Gov of Ireland, attend a Co-Operation Ireland Reception at Crosby Hall in London, England. During the reception The Queen unveiled a portrait of herself by artist Colin Davidson Getty

2/29 9 November 2016 Britain's Prime Minister Theresa May visits the Someshwara Swamy temple in Bengaluru, India Reuters

3/29 9 November 2016 Britain's Prime Minister Theresa May receives a souvenir from officials during her visit to the Someshwara Swamy temple in Bengaluru, India Reuters

4/29 9 November 2016 Britain's Prime Minister Theresa May stands among Indian school children as they watch a fly-past by Indian Airforce planes during a visit to a school on the outskirts of Bangalore Getty

5/29 9 November 2016 Heavy snow in Tow Law, in County Durham, after wintry weather swept across northern England PA wire

6/29 8 November 2016 A photographer captures the sun as it rises over the Vale of Pewsey in Wiltshire PA wire

7/29 8 November 2016 A low mist covers the fields as the sun rises over the Vale of Pewsey near to Marlborough in Wiltshire PA wire

8/29 8 November 2016 Seaham Lighthouse in Co Durham as a gap in the cloud lets the sun through PA wire

9/29 7 November 2016 Remembrance poppies added to parent and child parking bays outside a Sainsbury's store in Uxbridge PA wire

10/29 7 November 2016 Street artist Pegasus adds remembrance poppies to parent and child parking bays outside a Sainsbury's store in Uxbridge. He was commissioned by the supermarket to adorn the symbols across 22 stores around the country to mark their 22-year partnership with the Royal British Legion. To date, Sainsbury's has raised over £30 million for the charity's Poppy Appeal, helping provide vital care to past and present members of the armed forces PA wire

11/29 7 November 2016 The scene outside Bedford Prison after a riot which reportedly saw up to 200 inmates go on the rampage. The disturbance was successfully resolved after riot officers spent more than six hours trying to bring the disorder under control PA wire

12/29 7 November 2016 Prince Charles, Prince of Wales visits Bu Tinah island with Dr Shakha Salem al Dhahen, Director of Marine Biodiversity on the second day of a Royal tour of the United Arab Emirates Getty

13/29 7 November 2016 Camilla, Duchess of Cornwall visits the Abu Dhabi Falcon Hospital on the second day of a Royal tour of the United Arab Emirates. Prince Charles, Prince of Wales and Camilla, Duchess of Cornwall are on a Royal tour of the Middle East starting with Oman, then the UAE and finally Bahrain Getty

14/29 7 November 2016 Britain's Prince Charles talks to Dr. Sultan Al Jaber, UAE Minister of State and a member of the UAE Federal Cabinet, after his arrival Britain's Prince Charles visits Masdar City, a planned project which relies on sustainable energy, in Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates AP

15/29 7 November 2016 A replica landscape of the planet Mars is unveiled in London's Trafalgar Square, including the Mars Rover prototype 'Bridget', to mark the launch of new National Geographic television series 'MARS' PA wire

16/29 7 November 2016 A replica landscape of the planet Mars is unveiled in London's Trafalgar Square PA wire

17/29 7 November 2016 Toby Campbell, eight, interacts with a replica landscape of the planet Mars is unveiled in London's Trafalgar Square, including the Mars Rover prototype 'Bridget', to mark the launch of new National Geographic television series 'MARS' PA wire

18/29 6 November 2016 Prince of Wales and Camilla, Duchess of Cornwall are on a Royal tour of the Middle East starting with Oman, then the UAE and finally Bahrain Getty

19/29 6 November 2016 Participants drive their 1900 Cleveland electric, down the Mall in front of Buckingham Palace during the London to Brighton Veteran Car Run in London AP

20/29 6 November 2016 Participants drive their vintage cars past Westminster Bridge during the annual London to Brighton veteran car run in London Reuters

21/29 4 November 2016 Dancers Alice Rathbone and Daisy Edwards as characters from The Nutcracker Reuters

22/29 4 November 2016 Dancer Daisy Kerry poses as the Snow Queen from The Nutcracker Reuters

23/29 4 November 2016 Dancers pose as characters from The Nutcracker, for the annual Christmas event at Chatsworth House near Bakewell in Britain Reuters

24/29 4 November 2016 Dancers Alice Rathbone and Daisy Kerry pose as characters from The Nutcracker, for the annual Christmas event at Chatsworth House near Bakewell in Britain Reuters

25/29 1 November 2016 A woman looks at a work by Damien Hirst with David Bowie entitled Beautiful hallo, space-boy painting, 1995, during the press preview of The Personal Collection of David Bowie ahead of being sold by Sothebyís in London Nick Ansell/PA Wire

26/29 1 November 2016 Technicians carry a ladder as they prepare for the exhibition of British pop star David Bowie's art collection at Sotheby's auction house, in central London REUTERS/Hannah McKay

27/29 1 November 2016 'Air Power' by Jean-Michel Basquiat, with an estimate of £2.5 million - £3.5 million, part British pop star David Bowie's collection, is exhibited in a press view at Sotheby's auction house, in central London Reuters

28/29 1 November 2016 'Chess Set,' by man Ray, with an estimate of 20,000 GBP - 30,000 GBP, part of British pop star Bowie's art collection, is exhibited in a press view at Sotheby's auction house, in central London. The auction house will stage a three-part sale entitled Bowie/Collector, which includes 350 works from Bowie' s private collection Reuters

29/29 1 November 2016 A seagull sits on top of a lamp post, in front of the London Eye, during a foggy morning in central London REUTERS/Stefan Wermuth

Sure, I bet Allen’s feeling a bit rough today (aren’t we all?) but I am sure she feels all the better for partying with her partner and friends. What does make women sick, however, is the constant policing of our behaviour. So, if you really care about us as much as you profess to, put the zoom lens down. The real issue here isn’t one young mother having a good time while her kids are safely looked after elsewhere.