
Polly Toynbee: An anti-Corbyn verdict that will please Corbyn





The best part of the judgment was the ruling that Labour’s own governing body, the national executive committee, should be the “ultimate arbiter” of its own rules, and not the courts. The courtroom is entirely the wrong place to settle political disputes.
Labour’s deep and bloody schism looks set to rattle on for years, but let’s not have endless recourse to the beaks to sort out who is most in the wrong. As it happens, the court found in favour of the NEC’s right to decide who qualifies to vote in the present leadership election. That means 130,000 people who signed up after 12 January expecting a right to vote have been retrospectively struck off. Good news for the Owen Smithites, as it’s reckoned more of those new members now barred from voting were Corbynites. Though whether that alters the final result looks doubtful.




Labour NEC wins bid against allowing new members a leadership vote




But there are reasons why Corbyn supporters should also be pleased with this judgment. In the recent party election for constituency places on the NEC, the Corbyn slate swept the board – so the new NEC that takes over in September has just tilted in Corbyn’s favour. In future, those who went to the courts to protest at an NEC decision will be glad the court has decreed that the NEC is the “guardian of the constitution”. And so it should be.
Democracy is about electing representatives and throwing them out if you don’t like what they do. The Labour party will only recover its sanity and its electability when the membership decides it’s time to oust the Tory government, whatever it takes. Then it will elect an NEC ready to shape the party into a winning machine. Until then, keep out of the courtroom.





Putting aside the legal merits of today’s high court judgment, what does this episode tell us about what’s really happening in the Labour party?
Two fundamentally opposing visions are in conflict. The first seeks to market the parliamentary Labour party to majority public opinion, the press and big business as competent managers of the status quo. Here, the role of party members is to pay their fees, act as the doorstep infantry at election time, ratify predetermined policy decisions, and occasionally select a new party leader from a list pre-vetted by their elders and betters.
The second vision is one that sets the party a harder task: to win power in order to substantively change the country (as it did after world war two). This involves turning Labour into a social movement, with a mass membership playing an active day-to-day role in communities across the country, winning the battle for hearts and minds on the ground, countering the inevitable attacks from those with a vested interest in the Thatcher-Blair-Cameron settlement, and shaping party policy from the bottom up.
The Labour establishment, horrified by this second approach, is determined to strangle it in its crib. Hence this week’s retreat into “red scare” conspiracy theories and witch-hunts. Hence raising the registered supporters’ fee from £3 to £25, which will disproportionately affect Corbyn supporters, who are more likely to be working class. Hence the shameless disenfranchisement of tens of thousands of fee-paying members, which a high court judge upheld this afternoon.
While this has been going on, Owen Smith – the parliamentary Labour party’s candidate for leader – has been telling members that he shares their values and priorities and seeks only to pursue them more effectively. Would Smith stay committed to such an agenda if he won the leadership, or shift back rightwards once the vote was out of the way? A strong clue lies in the open contempt for members now on display from the party old guard standing behind him.

