
Strange as it may seem, given that Conservative governments look nailed on for many years, it wasn’t long ago that a Labour politician from the left of the party’s centre won a big election victory that many thought beyond him. He did it despite being not very well known, despite not starting out as the favourite to even be his party’s candidate, and despite being subjected to one of the most sustained negative campaigning onslaughts this country has ever seen. Not only did he win, he won by a fat margin. Strangest of all, his triumph happened less than three months ago.
As they immerse in their leadership bloodbath, even Labour party members could be forgiven for forgetting that it was only on 5 May that Sadiq Khan hammered his Tory opponent Zac Goldsmith to become mayor of London – and, in the process, the most powerful Labour politician in the land. It might cheer them up to start remembering. London has its own, distinctive political ecosystem, but Khan’s capture of City Hall holds valuable lessons both for those who are defiantly upbeat about their party’s national fortunes and those who are in despair, wherever in Britain they may live.




London is the world’s greatest city; we cannot sit back and do nothing about the rough sleeping crisis




Think back to how things were a year ago. David Cameron had won a shock majority at the general election and Tory hopes were pretty high that Goldsmith, seen as a charismatic, liberal maverick with lots of green appeal, could succeed Boris Johnson as the capital’s political leader, even though London had bucked the national trend by strengthening Labour’s position in the area in the 2015 general election. Come mid-September, they were more hopeful still. Labour’s London selectorate had rejected Tessa Jowell, the former Olympics minister and loyal lieutenant of Tony Blair, in favour of the “soft left” Khan, whose profile was lower and whose chances against the Richmond dreamboat looked less optimistic.
What happened next may distress some readers. Khan, having outflanked Jowell in part by courting the same people who made Corbyn party leader, then distanced himself from Corbyn at Road Runner speed. Yes, he was one of those MPs who’d “lent” Corbyn his nomination to let him into the Labour leadership race in the first place. But Khan stressed that he hadn’t voted for his new leader and went on to publicly rebuke him for failing to sing the national anthem. He also criticised the policies of the shadow chancellor John McDonnell and pledged to be “the most business-friendly mayor ever”.
Khan had his reasons. Goldsmith’s campaign was soon relentlessly yoking Khan’s name to Corbyn’s, claiming the pair planned a madcap “experiment” on a city Johnson had supposedly restored to greatness. Then came the focus on Khan’s religion. A string of past “links” – low journalese for guilt by association – with alleged Muslim extremists were successively reported in Tory-leaning papers, led by the Sunday Times.
The stories were thin – one of the supposed “extremists” turned out to be a Tory supporter – and the insinuation that Khan would be a tame accomplice in some dastardly Corbynite plot was drivel. But amid concerns about Islamist terrorism, the Tories’ stirring of doubts about Khan’s trustworthiness, indeed his very identity – “Who is Sadiq Khan?” they nudged and winked – seemed rich in destructive potential. As winter turned to spring, poll after poll showed Khan well ahead. But could they be believed?
They could. Khan won 44% of first preference votes under the supplementary vote system, compared with Goldsmith’s 35% – almost exactly the same proportions as Labour and Conservative parliamentary candidates had taken in London at the general election. Augmented by the lion’s share of second preference votes, Khan’s margin of victory was crushing.
There is some evidence that Goldsmith’s tactics worked, but insofar as they did, Khan’s campaign seems to have cancelled out their harmful effects. Every time the “scary Muslim” card was played, Khan looked to turn the attack to his advantage: “I will be the British Muslim who takes the fight to the extremists.”
If he wasn’t to the taste of some white British Londoners and some non-Muslim Asian ones, the latter famously targeted with the absurd proposition by Goldsmith that Khan yearned to tax their family jewellery, at least as many other Londoners were mobilised in his favour. The influence of Corbyn appears to have been neutral too, in line with Labour’s overall performance in London borough by-elections during the months after he became party leader.
What lessons can Labour members and supporters learn from this thumping win that suddenly feels so long ago? One is that Khan fought cannily, if not ruthlessly, sizing up the battleground, colonising the capital’s mainstream from the left, constructing pre-emptive defences against enemy attacks and playing to his strengths – the bus driver’s son from a council estate, and so on – with steely self-discipline. He maintained Labour’s London advantage and built on it in his own way. London is distinctive, but Khan’s skills are transferable. Others could apply them more widely.
It’s still early days for his administration. Not everything has gone smoothly: his flagship fares freeze promise looks set to be only partially kept, and making the capital’s “affordable” housing more worthy of the term will be hard, though work on that task has begun. He’s assembling a strong team – including many women in senior positions – and his plans to improve London’s air quality are already leaving Johnson’s in the dust. While sending out the message that “London Is Open” post-Brexit, Khan has been lobbying Tory ministers hard to give the capital more autonomy, knowing, as they do, that greater devolution would help to protect its economy, on which the whole UK so heavily depends.
In line with his promises about security, he has intensified the presence of armed Metropolitan police officers. He returned early to London from a family holiday in response to the Russell Square stabbings amid initial concerns, later ruled out, that the incident might have been terror related. This made a conspicuous contrast with Johnson’s seemingly less urgent return from a summer break when the 2011 riots kicked off in the capital.
Here is the craft and the hard graft of exercising power. It won’t deliver everything Labour members desire, but for most of those in London it beats the hell out of going without.

