
Apple is about to launch a new iPhone. I remember when, under Steve Jobs, the arrival of a new iPhone was a breathless and secretive affair, as though Willy Wonka himself was emerging from his factory and making impossible claims of his improbable technology. And if the iPhone didn’t quite live up – if it took years to get copying and pasting, or if Siri was basically a party trick – no one minded so much, because Jobs was the tech universe version of the late Gene Wilder, giving an idiosyncratic performance nobody can explain or match.
How far we’ve fallen. I’m writing this the night before the iPhone 7 unveiling, and I know nothing will surprise us. You heard it here first: the new iPhone will look and act almost exactly like the current iPhone to any normal person. It will probably be a little faster, come in a new color choice, and be absolutely boring. This time the big killer feature, apparently, is that there’s no headphone port.
How fantastic – I have been looking for an opportunity to throw away all my headphones and buy new ones directly from Apple. I can’t wait to watch Tim Cook ploddingly explain how much better everything will be in the new version. I love listening to Cook because when you look in his eyes you can tell he knows he’s a second-string community theater actor trying desperately to speak fancy words he learned by rote, following in the footsteps of the man who had the job before he did, Sir Laurence Goddamn Olivier.
This is the new Apple. Not because Jobs wouldn’t have cut the headphone port if he could – he loved that move; he practically invented it. It’s just that the only reason Apple knows it can pull it off now is brute force and thuggery. We are locked into its ecosystem. What used to take some magic and pizzazz, some dreams of a better future, is now just keeping up appearances.
This new Apple is reflected in the company’s current tax fiasco, a situation that sounds more like something fly-by-night scam artists would get caught doing than the Apple we think we remember. Through a scheme literally called the “Double Irish”, a company can create two Irish subsidiary companies, and the first Irish company (usually in the Cayman Islands) licenses everything to a second Irish company, the upshot being that the mothership is not considered a tax resident anywhere thanks to differences between the US and Irish definitions of residence.
The result of all this is that Apple had a “head office” in Ireland with no premises, no employees and no real activities. But because they had pulled the Double Irish, the European commission has ruled, Apple deprived the EU of $14.5bn over the last 10 years. The EU ordered Apple to pay the taxes with interest at the end of August, a decision whose logic the company refutes.
This is hardly surprising: Apple is a massive multinational, and behaves like one despite its sanitized image. It has a long track record of looking the other way on suppliers’ human rights abuses, documented by the New York Times and other outlets. And it pays a tax rate lower than that of 99.99% of the human beings reading this story right now – and they clearly work harder at that profit margin and squeezing their supply chain now than they do on their actual technology. And in the last few years it is beginning to show.
You shouldn’t buy a new iPhone because it won’t be appreciably better than what you’re using now. You shouldn’t buy a new iPhone because it won’t have a headphone port for no user benefit other than to maximize corporate profits. You shouldn’t buy a new iPhone now because Apple could easily pay the tax judgment they owe, and they refuse to do so.
You shouldn’t buy a new iPhone because Steve Jobs wouldn’t have wanted you to reward mediocrity.

