
The practice of art and the notion of restorative justice and therapeutic jurisprudence in attending to the offending behaviour of convicted criminals is something of a hand-in-glove affair.   In the practice of art, a blank canvas is addressed and accepted in its raw state, is then primed and prepared and taken to task, altering it by strategically applying appropriate forms of medium, in varying techniques with the end result of producing a piece of what society would arguably concede to be “art”.   The key elements to producing that work are (loosely) committing to the process, gathering the resources, setting to the task while accepting that a series of mistakes will be made during the creative process, acknowledging that there will be discomfort and hard emotional realisations in correcting, and more importantly, learning from those events will occur that will forever alter the attitudinal framework and mindset of the artist at hand.




My art is a personal antidote for the effects of colonisation | Katie West for @IndigenousX




The decision making process alone teaches patience, resilience, attention to micro and macro detail, consequential responsibility for decisions made and put into practise as well as the reality of realised self expression, possibly for the first time.  These tasks activate parts of the mind, intellect, social and emotional being that may otherwise lay dormant and unexpressed. Both sides of the brain are required to function and it has been proven time and again that self actuated desire to numeracy and literacy competence are a natural consequence of exposure to the pursuit of producing art. It’s worth noting that around or over 80% of people in prison have literacy and/or numeracy challenges. In most cases this deficit has contributed to the circumstance of their offending behaviour.  The key element is educational empathic engagement.   If this holds water, perhaps suggesting that art programmes in prisons would be of benefit to prisoners is not too much of a stretch. Further to that then, perhaps pointing out that everybody inside prisons are directly affected by the climate and culture inside prisons, it might not be too much of a stretch to suggest that the staff of prisons would also stand to benefit from the effects of working with a population that is actively engaged in serving their time rather than dealing with the unrelenting boredom of current incarceration practise. 
Practising art is perfect for the emotional and intellectual wellbeing of those with nothing but time to kill because it is something that is never fully learnt. The results would be tangible and far reaching within and external to the prisons. The return on investment would be present in terms of decreased sick leave, stress leave, etc. quite rapidly.
 Of course, not everybody’s an artist – that’s so true – however pretty much everyone benefits from exposure to positive self expression, particularly when the content is driven by harsh, often destructive, unexpressed emotion, often born of historic trauma.   Avenues for opportunistic, therapeutic intervention through art therapy practices naturally present themselves in creative environments as alluded to above and have been proven successful.   It is said that the hardest part of producing any painting is applying paint to the canvas. Once this step is taken the rest pretty much looks after itself. I’d like to see that principal put into practice with those who could most benefit themselves and broader society, by the institutions charged with correcting offending behaviour. It’s doable. It just needs doing. Because at the moment, with very few exceptions, it is not being done. We as a society pay for the results dearly.   The choice simply is this; what product do we want our correctional centres to produce? Do we want the to produce people who have learned from their mistakes and have bettered themselves? Or do we want them to produce people are released back into the world, profoundly damaged by the experience of punishment, deprivation of liberty, humanity and dignity by being purely punished by being locked up.   In Queensland, prisoners are not allowed to make any money from sales of work produced whilst incarcerated. The situation is born of legislation introduced early this decade. There seems to be no purpose served by the legislation. While it is in place it makes an already difficult situation much more challenging. The prisons are naturally, lawfully obliged to adhere to the existing legislation, regardless of its veracity, or lack thereof.   What happens inside the walls of our prisons is a very concentrated, intense version of the society of the day, which is perhaps an interesting, if unpalatable commentary on contemporary Australian society. It could even beg the question, how far has mainstream Australia, as a society progressed beyond it’s prison colony beginnings.
As a member of the Brisbane Council of Elders, I visit our brothers and sisters in all the prisons from Maryborough south to the Queensland/New South Wales border, as well as visiting our young ones in the Queensland Juvenile Detention Centre. 
In one particular prison, our visits go beyond the contact and non-contact visit areas where family and legal representative visits are conducted. We are deep within whichever complex our schedule throws up, and when we visit we are surrounded by what the outside world would call hardened criminals. Sometimes we will not have guards around us, save for the occasional cultural liaison officer during our visit and will never feel anything other than completely safe and comfortable. 
We will be in the company of around 40 inmates and I will watch Aunties melt young men with a few words and Uncles have a series of warm, demonstratively affectionate greetings that inevitably leads to a series of yarns that last the duration of our four hours inside. We will be regularly asked if we’d like coffee, tea, cold water and biscuits brought to us where we sit, always with care and beautiful manners.
 The description of what we experience is perhaps a counterintuitive scenario to what you the reader may expect to read. This particular facility, even though it’s as overcrowded as the rest, has a well supported, well resourced, well accessed arts centre and education centre. This is not the case everywhere, and it is incredibly noticeable in the demeanour of the inmates and staff alike.   It’s my intention to see the conditions of this prison as the rule rather than the exception. I’m hoping, after reading this, it might become a consideration of yours too.
“Our stories, our way” – each week, a new guest hosts the @IndigenousX Twitter account to discuss topics of interest to them as Aboriginal and/or Torres Strait Islander people. Produced with assistance of Guardian Australia staff.

