The impeachment of Dilma Rousseff is not just the story of one woman, who in her youth bravely fought dictatorship, rose to become president and has now been ushered from power amid an unprecedented country-wide corruption scandal. It is also the story of a nation: South America’s largest country, once applauded for its growing influence and its fight against poverty, now struggling with political tensions that have up-ended the 13-year rule of its Workers’ party (brought to prominence by Ms Rousseff’s charismatic predecessor and mentor, Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva). It is equally a tale of today’s shifting global landscape, in which powers that just years ago were celebrated as “emerging” and likely to reshape the world find themselves confronted by difficulties rooted in economic downturns and flawed governance.

Brazil’s senate voted 61 to 20 for her removal today. That her ousting had the hallmarks of a personal tragedy is hard to dispute. There were tears and shows of anger, as Ms Rousseff put up an epic fight against what she and her supporters have consistently called a “coup”, but her many critics described as the logical outcome of a long, constitutional process aimed at clearing the graft and unaccountability that have too long dominated Brazilian politics. Emotions were high as Ms Rousseff drew parallels with the way she had endured torture under Brazil’s military dictatorship. “I won’t abandon the principles that have guided me,” she said.

“This isn’t a coup, it’s democracy in evolution,” one opposition senator answered back.

It is hard to overlook a degree of unfairness in this brutal downfall: Ms Rousseff never stood accused of personally benefiting from corruption (she was on trial for window-dressing state budget figures), unlike dozens of Brazilian officials and politicians – many of whom voted for her removal. That the crisis has come to this cathartic moment says perhaps as much about an “evolving” democracy as about the cynicism of some of its elites, much exposed by the Petrobras and Lavo Jato corruption investigations.

This has been a downwards slide for Brazil. In 2010, when Ms Rousseff was first elected, Brazil was the seventh-largest economy in the world and widely recognised as a power on the rise. It wanted to display its accomplishments as host of the 2014 World Cup and this summer’s Olympic Games. Its successes in reducing inequalities made it a model for the global south. But the collapse of commodity prices halted a decade-long export boom – and social tensions, mass street demonstrations (triggered by bus fare rises in 2013) and popular discontent, including among the new middle classes, emerged. That the opposition to her Workers’ party capitalised on these frustrations is unsurprising. But to say Brazil’s rightwing forces emerged looking “cleaner” than the government when financial dealings and vast political kickback schemes were uncovered would be a stretch of the imagination.

Brazil’s crisis in some ways resembles those of other “developing” countries where governance issues and economic setbacks have led to political tensions: witness the difficulties of South Africa’s ANC or the anti-corruption campaigns waged by China’s autocratic leader. None of this can be a consolation for Ms Rousseff, nor will it erase the mistakes she made as a leader. But to ascribe all of Brazil’s ills to one woman, or think they will disappear with one vote, would be both simplistic and disingenuous.

Many of those happy to see her thrown from office are the very people who hope that, as a result, they will be spared the attention of anti-corruption judges. Brazil is now a highly polarised nation and its citizens are deeply divided, but they want a political class that can restore the public confidence needed to address the country’s many challenges. Whether the new president Michel Temer – who had led the attacks against Ms Rousseff – can deliver on those expectations is the next daunting question.