Labour MPs this week voted overwhelmingly to restore their power to elect the shadow cabinet, a right they held from the party’s early days until Ed Miliband abolished it in 2011. The motion, proposed by Clive Betts, was passed by 169 votes to 34 on Tuesday night. It requires Labour’s national executive, which meets next week, to put a rule change to the party conference this month. If that happens, the parliamentary Labour party would elect a new shadow cabinet in the autumn. Labour would be wise to adopt Mr Betts’ proposal. The issue may seem arcane. But its implications are profound.

Harold Wilson often described Labour as a broad church. He was right. The party has always been a formal and informal coalition of interests and views. In the old industrial Britain in which the Labour representation committee was created in 1900, Labour’s formal coalition was based on trade unions and socialist societies. Over the years, reflecting social and economic changes of many kinds, individual membership took on greater significance. In the last two decades, much of that institutional and cultural texture has been scrapped in favour of the centralisation of power around the party leader. That was a mistake on many grounds. It should now be carefully undone.

Labour badly needs to re-energise its own traditions of coalition and pluralism. The surge of support for Jeremy Corbyn is a powerful part of that process. Even Mr Corbyn’s strongest critics need to recognise that. But it is not the only thing that matters. The party needs, as a whole and as a matter of urgency, to live better with inevitable differences of interest and view. It should do that for reasons of liberal principle and of self-interest. No one who remembers or knows about past divisions, notably the breakaway of the Social Democratic party in 1981, should want a return to that. Both the 1981 split itself and the culture of internal bitterness that went with it deprived 1980s Britain of an effective opposition. The need to prevent a repetition is very pressing indeed.

Labour will not survive as a coherent potential party of government if one group seeks to obliterate the others. The past 12 months have proved that, as the New Labour era also did. Things cannot and must not go on this way. Labour cannot afford a repetition, whatever the result of the leadership contest. Voters who wish the party well or who rely on the prospect of an alternative government deserve better. For Labour to descend into internal wars about candidate selection – a live danger when new constituency boundary proposals are published next week – would be a betrayal.

The reintroduction of shadow cabinet elections within the PLP will not solve all these problems at a stroke. But it would be a recognition that one of Labour’s priorities must be to live with itself, so that it can begin the process of becoming an effective opposition and a potential party of government again. That, after all, is what the Conservative party factions are trying to do after the referendum. Labour meanwhile is in denial. Mr Betts, who is not a partisan figure, proposed his motion on the basis that it would be part of a process of coming together after the leadership election. Mr Corbyn should now embrace that approach too.

There are many reasons why. First, shadow cabinet elections would enable the leader to put together a better team than he has now. Second, it would be a much needed sign that both sides are prepared to do things differently. Third, the leader would still be able to add some shadow picks of his own choice and would retain control of the distribution of briefs. Fourth, it would make Labour a much more convincing force in parliament and beyond. Fifth, it would respond to the desperate wish for unity and effectiveness among Labour’s members. Sixth, it would send a signal to the non-Labour parts of Britain that Labour wishes to be a party of government, not merely an oppositional movement.

Many will view the PLP’s proposal as a power grab. Yet all sides need to move away from seeing everything as a zero-sum game. The change might actually help Mr Corbyn as well as calm his MPs. If he is re-elected, the last thing Mr Corbyn should want is to continue battling with a recalcitrant internal opposition. An elected shadow cabinet might mean he had to work with MPs he has clashed with. But it would also be a sign that they were readier to work with him. Labour needs to move on from a destructive struggle for control. This might at least help to give the party a chance.