Theresa May had two months to formulate her pre-prepared jokes at Prime Minister’s Questions this week – and yet they arrived with all the grace and subtlety of the ram-packed 11am Virgin East Coast service to Newcastle. Jeremy Corbyn “is a laughing stock on rolling stock”. Brexit Schmexit. The real scandal is that someone got paid taxpayers’ money to come up with that.

The other gag was more intriguing. With the whole summer to work on it, it is arguable that in choosing to read a tweet from a member of the public by the name of @swingaleg, who had ungenerously pointed out to the Labour leader that “don’t know” was currently faring better than he in the Potential Prime Ministerial approval ratings, it has been suggested the May entourage should have taken a minute to check out a bit of the @swingaleg back catalogue.

It transpires that Corbyn is not the only person to find themselves cut to the online quick by the razor-sharp barbs of this singularly incisive cultural commentator. “Every time a Polish person gets lamped, it will always be a Brexit hate crime, even if they asked for it,” he pointed out, in the wake of the killing of a Polish man by a gang of teenagers on the streets of Harlow.

He has also defended the man who killed Jo Cox and told the novelist Elizabeth Day to “piss off you stupid, feminist piece of shit”.

The @swingaleg back catalogue has, in the last 24 hours, sent gentle ripples across the surface of the outraged community, noticed by this media organisation and one or two others. But it is not unreasonable to imagine, had Team Corbyn done the same, the usual media feeding frenzy would be at full power.

So is Theresa May getting an easy ride? As the political world obsesses over the latest chapter in Labour’s slow-motion harakiri, should more attention be being paid to the people who are actually making the decisions, not least since they are currently making the most important decisions that have been made in the UK for half a century or more?

Why isn’t the press “out to get her” like they are Corbyn? The answer is not altogether straightforward. Certainly, like every new Prime Minister, and indeed every new leader of the opposition, she has a right to a honeymoon period. Corbyn had one. He has had a full year now to earn the hostility he now receives, and earn it he most certainly has.

The most ridiculous claims made about Jeremy Corbyn







11 show all The most ridiculous claims made about Jeremy Corbyn



















1/11 He called Hezbollah and Hamas ‘friends’ True. In a speech made to the Stop the War Coalition in 2009, Mr Corbyn called representatives from both groups “friends” after inviting them to Parliament. He later told Channel 4 he wanted both groups, who have factions designated as international terror organisations, to be “part of the debate” for the Middle East peace process. “I use (the word ‘friends’) in a collective way, saying our friends are prepared to talk,” he added. “Does it mean I agree with Hamas and what it does? No. Does it mean I agree with Hezbollah and what they do? No.” Reuters

2/11 ‘Jeremy Corbyn thinks the death of Osama bin Laden was a tragedy’ Partly false. David Cameron used this as a line of attack at the Conservative Party conference but appears to have left out all context from Mr Corbyn’s original remarks. In an 2011 interview on Iranian television, the then-backbencher said the fact the al-Qaeda leader was not put on trial was the tragedy, continuing: “The World Trade Center was a tragedy, the attack on Afghanistan was a tragedy, the war in Iraq was a tragedy.”

3/11 He is ‘haunted’ by the legacy of his ‘evil’ great-great-grandfather False. A Daily Express exposé revealed that the Labour leader’s ancestor, James Sargent, was the “despotic” master of a Victorian workhouse. Addressing the report at the Labour conference, Mr Corbyn said he had never heard of him before, adding: “I want to take this opportunity to apologise for not doing the decent thing and going back in time and having a chat with him about his appalling behaviour.”

4/11 Jeremy Corbyn raised a motion about ‘pigeon bombs’ in Parliament This one is true. On 21 May 2004, Mr Corbyn raised an early day motion entitled “pigeon bombs”, proposing that the House register being “appalled but barely surprised” that MI5 reportedly proposed to load pigeons with explosives as a weapon. The motion continued: “The House… believes that humans represent the most obscene, perverted, cruel, uncivilised and lethal species ever to inhabit the planet and looks forward to the day when the inevitable asteroid slams into the earth and wipes them out thus giving nature the opportunity to start again.” It was not carried.

5/11 He rides a Communist bicycle False. A report in The Times referred to Mr Corbyn, known for his cycling, riding a “Chairman Mao-style bicycle” earlier this year. “Less thorough journalists might have referred to it as just a bicycle, but no, so we have to conclude that whenever we see somebody on a bicycle from now on, there goes another supporter of Chairman Mao,” he later joked.

6/11 'Jeremy Corbyn will appoint a special minister for Jews' False so far. The Sun report in December was allegedly based on a “rumour” passed to the paper by a Daily Express columnist who has written pieces critical of the Labour leader in the past. The minister did not materialise in his shadow cabinet.

7/11 ‘Jeremy Corbyn wishes Britain would abolish its Army’ False. Another gem from The Sun took comments made at a Hiroshima remembrance parade in August 2012 where Mr Corbyn supported Costa Rica’s move to abolish it armed forces. “Wouldn’t it be wonderful if every politician around the world…abolished the army and took pride in the fact that they don’t have an army,” he added. The caveat that “every politician” must take the step suggests Mr Corbyn does not support UK disarmament just yet.

8/11 Jeremy Corbyn stole sandwiches meant for veterans False. The Guido Fawkes blog claimed that the Labour leader took sandwiches meant for veterans at at Battle of Britain memorial service in September but a photo later emerged showing him being handed one by Costa volunteers, who later confirmed they were given to all guests.

9/11 He missed the induction into the Queen’s privy council True. After much speculation about Mr Corbyn’s republican views and willingness to bow to the monarch, his office confirmed that he did not attend the official induction to the privy council because of a prior engagement, but did not rule out joining the body.

10/11 Jeremy Corbyn refuses to sing the national anthem. Partly true. The Labour leader was filmed standing in silence as God Save the Queen was sung at a Battle of Britain remembrance service but will reportedly sing it in future. Mr Corbyn was elusive on the issue in an interview, saying he would show memorials “respect in the proper way”, but sources said he would sing the anthem at future occasions.

11/11 He is a member of the All-Party Parliamentary Group for Cheese True. The group lists its purpose as the following: “To increase awareness of issues surrounding the dairy industry and focus on economic issues affecting the dairy industry and producers.”

But more to the point, it takes a new government a certain amount of time to make its enemies. For example, in the high summer of 1997, it would be years before Gordon Brown had set up a deep and complex operation to brief against Tony Blair and his allies.

When whole new government departments form, like the Department for International Trade, and the Department for Exiting the European Union, well-placed individuals determined to undermine them or do them damage for their own, often widely varying, reasons have not yet come into being.

All new Prime Ministers deserve a honeymoon. But with a premiership as complex and crucial, and forged in the most angry and divisive chaos that has probably ever been known, it will not last. That cannot be in any doubt.