
Fighting to stay in the European Union may seem a hopeless cause if you look at the political situation today. The British people have voted to leave the EU. Theresa May is committed to deliver Brexit. David Davis, the Brexit secretary, rammed this home in a speech in parliament on Monday, saying there would be no second referendum. Jeremy Corbyn, the leader of the opposition, has also accepted that we will quit.




David Davis vows to build national consensus on Brexit




But what if a significant number of leave voters change their minds? This is not pie in the sky. After all, we were all lied to during the campaign. Brexiteers told us that Britain sends £350m a week to Brussels and that Turkey is scheduled to join the EU in 2020, when neither is true. They promised we could have our cake and eat it – access to the single market, control of our laws, no budget contributions, an end to free movement and so forth.
But on her way to the G20 summit, the prime minister refused to endorse some of Vote Leave’s pledges – an Australian-style points system to control migration, no more contributions to the EU budget, and an extra £100m a week for the NHS. Meanwhile, the Japanese government warned that its firms may shift activities from Britain to the EU if we botch the Brexit process.
More politicians may even follow Gordon Brown in arguing that Britain can help lead the EU if it stays. The failure to make any positive case for our membership was one of David Cameron’s many sins. We need such a vision if we are to persuade the electorate that we should stay in the EU.
We also need to show that many of the genuine problems that troubled leave voters – stagnant wages, crowded schools and GP surgeries, not enough homes – are the fault of our government, not the EU.




 

A significant number of leave voters need to change their minds




 

This is why I and some others who wished to remain have launched a new group, CommonGround, that promotes a broad vision for Britain, rather than simply wanting to stay in the EU. We have to find common ground with leave voters on the need for a fair and open society and for honest politics, which was in short supply on both sides of the referendum debate.
Now, of course, even if some leave voters change their minds, the people may still not get a chance to vote on the Brexit terms. But let’s peer into the crystal ball and consider a series of admittedly slim possibilities. The prime minister has craftily put two Brexiteers – Davis and Liam Fox – in charge of negotiating Brexit. If they come up with a terrible deal, she may be able to dissociate herself from it.
Alternatively, Labour may get a new pro-European leader or a chunk of its MPs may split off and form their own party. Although Corbyn seems to have the leadership sewn up and most MPs are too scared to leave the mother ship now, things may change in the next couple of years. If so, enough pro-European Tories may join forces with Labour to require the government to hold a referendum on the Brexit deal.
It’s also possible that such a plebiscite is already legally required. Under the so-called referendum lock legislation passed in 2011, the people have to authorise any treaty that replaces the existing EU treaties. A Brexit deal is likely to involve a new treaty. A clever lawyer could say this would replace the existing ones. If this argument holds water, we may have a new referendum whether May likes it or not.
Finally, something may change in the EU that gives May a good excuse to consult the people again – either with a referendum or an election. In particular, if the EU was prepared to reform free movement, the prime minister might modify her mantra that Brexit means Brexit.
Now, of course, the EU isn’t remotely close to making such a change. But next year there is a French presidential election followed by a German general election. The far right is on the march pretty much everywhere, playing on people’s fears over immigration. Germany’s Alternative für Deutschland beat Angela Merkel’s party in a state election at the weekend.
The main concern across the Channel is over migration of large numbers of people from outside the EU, rather than freedom of movement of workers within the EU. But, as in the UK referendum, populist politicians may find it convenient to muddle the two issues. If so, mainstream politicians may respond by eventually agreeing to modify free movement.
Listing these possibilities may seem like clutching at straws. Each scenario is a low-probability event. But they don’t all have to occur for Britain to stay in the EU. If even one happens, that may be enough.
What does have to happen is that a significant number of leave voters need to change their minds. That could in turn trigger one of the other possibilities – a U-turn by May, a change in the Labour party, or even the willingness of our European partners to offer Britain a concession to persuade us to stay.
My own view is that the chance of staying in the EU is now no better than 25%. But no Brexit is a good Brexit except, just maybe, the pure fantasy one promised by the leave camp. Some things are worth fighting for even when the odds are long. This is one of them.

