
The Houses of Parliament form a fine Gothic building, but every time I have cause to visit I’m not overawed. This time, as part of a Rights Not Games week of action, we’re fighting to exhaustion for the independent living of disabled people. Again.
As Inclusion London launches its shocking report into life for disabled people a year after the closure of the Independent Living Fund (ILF), we’re on repeat. The government’s promises and the extension of the ILF transition funds have not materialised. Cuts are savage and suffering is incalculable, with many ex-ILF recipients imprisoned, left living in their own mess and sleeping in vomit. Animals would be rescued from such conditions.
We’re on the receiving end of social workers who are poorly trained and ill-equipped to understand the complexity of our needs, whether it’s basic things like assistance to use the toilet, or those tasks that allow for a functioning relationship with friends, family, within a community and sometimes with work. I teeter on this brink, pushed through assessment and assessment, in a limbo of anxious unknowing.




 

Rights Not Games isn’t about attacking the Paralympics




 

Sitting in the committee room, I am reminded of the scene in the film Suffragette, where Maud is presenting evidence of inequality to the David Lloyd George government, which ultimately reneged on all promises. These days, the faces are younger, and at the table there’s a mix of disabled activists, interested parties and MPs including shadow chancellor John McDonnell. The majority simply don’t grasp the reality of disabled lives and that the inequality is brutally pervasive, but McDonnell always speaks with heart (as does sturdy supporter Jeremy Corbyn) – and outrage, understanding we are citizens, targeted unjustly to carry the weight of the financial crises. Jonathan Bartley, new co-leader of the Green party spoke with almost painful emotion about his concerns for his disabled son’s future, as independent living is crushed.
But while Rights Not Games isn’t about attacking the Paralympics in themselves, it is the perfect opportunity to highlight the wretched depths in which we, ordinary disabled mortals, find ourselves, and to highlight how the stereotypes are polarised between superhuman and scrounger.
While we’ve had some success (with Atos especially) and kept our profile high, the government’s policies continue to hammer us.
On Wednesday we march on Downing Street to highlight the deaths connected to the work capability assessment, and the distressing nature of what many disabled people go through. Theresa May is plainly not a beacon of optimism for disabled people. She was diligent in her support for the David Cameron government, and has many Tory ticks for supporting welfare cuts including the despised bedroom tax. These multiple, merciless attacks on us have resulted in the UK being the only country investigated by the UN for violations into disabled people’s human rights.
The hyping of disabled athletes into superhuman status by Channel 4 only deepens our wounds, inflicted by continual assaults on our daily lives. It truly seems that the only acceptable disabled person is a Paralympian – and then only for a few weeks. The disabled sportspeople who went to Rio also carried the burden of securing Channel 4’s viewing figures on the back of a massive publicity campaign.
We even had Paralympics posters with “Dis” blanked out and “ability” left blazing. The idea of “See the ability not the disability” is a government-favoured, antiquated approach that harks back to the Disability Confident scheme for employers. We hoped we’d buried these notions years ago.




The disability benefit cuts you haven't heard about




Many disabled people know that disability is a social construct. This is a kindergarten-level social model of disability, developed by disabled academics over 40 years ago. It forms the rock on which we pitch our actions and protests. It highlights the utter pointlessness of these endless government schemes, and the encouraging of employers (et al) to like us and employ us – while the unending fact of inaccessible environments and savage attacks on our services continues to invalidate such proposals.
Ultimately we come back to the excesses of capitalism, and years of government lack of interest as a natural result of it. The barriers to our participation, our wellbeing and our existence can be removed and at least improved by financial input into infrastructure, social care and a fully compliant civil rights law.
Sometimes I am so weary with this fight, even as this Monday 5 September, I happily joined my friends and allies in blocking Whitehall for a street theatre protest by the gates of Downing Street. The police are always surprised but polite, and at times joined in with our songs.
The superhuman shtick is a tiresome diversion away from what is important. Let us be ordinary, let us be every day and let us at least have rights. Rights to independent living.
Rights not Games.

