
The aftermath of the Brexit referendum has taken me back to Philip Larkin, DH Lawrence, Thomas Hardy and the culture of the so-called leave regions of England. Well before the European Economic Community came into existence in 1957, Larkin was espousing the virtues of “leaving” and of separateness. His extraordinary and strikingly small body of verse must now be seen as a significant, undeniable and vivid component in the cultural history of the leave camp.




Think the north and the poor caused Brexit? Think again | Zoe Williams




It seems like Larkin had long been preparing his English readership for Brexit. He found his characteristic voice – urbane, colloquial, morose, lyrical, dismissive of lyricism, at once essentially rooted and maladjusted – by his second book, The Less Deceived. What was evident too by then was how much the poetry owed to his particular vision of an England that was non-metropolitan but not necessarily “natural” (unlike the wild terrain his contemporary Ted Hughes was invested in); an England that was suburban and dull, the remnants of which, two months ago, voted largely to exit Europe.
Larkin was not known as a propagator of happiness. Nor did he seem to believe that the English were equipped to be happy. When asked by an interviewer for the Observer whether he thought “people go around feeling they haven’t got out of life what life has to offer’, he replied, ‘I should think quite a lot of people do’, adding, of his own predilections, “deprivation is for me what daffodils were to Wordsworth”. At the beginning of the interview, he’d clarified: “It’s very difficult to write about being happy. Very easy to write about being miserable.”
In lieu of happiness, he desired a sense of being settled immovably in the familiar, which for him meant being situated “on the way to nowhere” – the very zone from which many of the leavers have now spoken. This, for him, was Hull (where, as it happens, more than 75,000 people voted to leave: nearly twice the number of those who wanted to remain), through which Larkin expressed his acute need to keep the world at bay: “I like it because it’s so far away from everywhere else.” “Would you like to visit, say, China?” an interviewer from the Paris Review this time asked him. Larkin said: “I wouldn’t mind seeing China if I could come back the same day. I hate being abroad.”











EU referendum: Brexit for non-Brits


Larkin may have thrilled to life’s deprivations, but it was the England that came up between the fall of empire and the advent of Margaret Thatcher (whom he admired) and the discovery of North Sea oil that quickened him strangely. No one else could have been nostalgic for the dullness of housing estates in quite the same way as he was.
For him, the peripheral constituencies far from London were a perpetual discovery. In an early poem, Coming, he notes how “A thrush sings, / Laurel-surrounded / In the deep bare garden, / Its fresh-peeled voice / Astonishing the brickwork”. The thrush and the “deep bare garden” come to Larkin from his mentor Thomas Hardy, but the contemporaneity of “astonishing the brickwork” is Larkin’s, and embodies an England at once secret and in danger of vanishing the moment it’s appeared.
This is the Britain of manufacturing, whose days were numbered, and which, in Dockery and Son, the narrator glimpses from a train window after returning from a visit to his old college: “I fell asleep, waking at the fumes / And furnace-glares of Sheffield”. At the college, “the Dean” has reminded him that his classmate Dockery is dead, and revealed that he had a son who’s now at the same college. Like Larkin, the narrator is single, and reflects, in the train, that “To have no son, no wife, / No house or land still seemed quite natural”.




Jeremy Corbyn rules out second referendum on Brexit




A key theme is being broached here, related to Larkin’s own stubborn bachelorhood: that to be English is not to be happy, necessarily – the opposite might be true – but it is at least to be alone and undisturbed. Indeed, this could well be the “natural” condition of being English. Although Larkin wrote tenderly of English wedding rituals (“A dozen marriages got under way”), marriage and its outcome – children – perplex the narrator: “how / Convinced he [Dockery] was he should be added to!/ Why did he think adding meant increase?/ To me it was dilution”.
This is fundamental both to the romance of Brexit and to the hysteria over immigration: the belief that separateness is England’s, and thus Britain’s, destiny, and that “adding” entails dilution of a culture rather than a form of increase. Multiculturalism itself is a complex marriage of societies with long-term consequences, and it’s a kind of marriage that the Larkinesque bachelor would always have been resistant to.
Post-referendum wisdom has reiterated that the leave campaign was unexpectedly successful because of all the people who live in towns “on the way to nowhere”: their vote was a rebuttal of the London elite. But is it true that this elite comprises the only British people (besides the Scots) who feel European, that the underprivileged or marginal are necessarily inward-looking and provincial and seized by a Larkinesque disdain of “abroad”?
That would be to underestimate the sense of entitlement in upper middle-class nostalgia for a particular England and a particular Europe, and to ignore the robust engagement with European – and world – culture in the history of the English working class. It would be to forget Lawrence, with his transformative vision of the Etruscan tombs in Italy and the rural marketplace in Mexico. Lawrence was a man whose radical cosmopolitanism could never have been formed in Eton and Oxford but only in Nottingham (a city which voted for Brexit by only a slender margin).
It’s also to forget the Beatles, who emerged from Liverpool but served their apprenticeship in Hamburg. John Lennon, born to working-class parents who had separated, was a brilliant curator of local English culture in songs like Being For the Benefit of Mr Kite, in a way that makes him a precursor to present-day curators of peripheral English communities like the artist Jeremy Deller. But Lennon’s ironical perspective on Englishness in such songs came surely not from closing ranks but from his constant access and openness to other cultures. It’s an openness that prompted him to instruct George Martin to play a faux-Bach piano interlude in In My Life, and led to his important intellectual partnership with Yoko Ono
Then there’s David Hockney, born in Bradford to, in his own words, a “radical working-class family”, and plunged in childhood into the European masters.
Modern Britain’s cultural relationship with Europe would be attenuated without the working-class suburbs of industrial towns. If it has forgotten this fact in the last 30 years and handed proprietorship of that relationship to a tiny set in London, it must ask itself why.

