
On a recent trip to my hometown of Milwaukee, Wisconsin, I rode the bus from Martin Luther King Drive at Burleigh Avenue to meet an interviewee near Sherman Park. I counted how many foreclosure sale signs there were compared with occupied (often dilapidated) homes along the route, as well as storefronts, businesses and supermarkets. It’s a skill I picked up in the days when I worked in affordable housing development and planning in New York. But if I’m honest, I probably learned it earlier, as a teenager in growing up in Milwaukee. I learned then to look at communities as a whole.
What do we know about the shooting that sparked protests over the past two nights? Twenty-three-year-old Sylville Smith had an arrest record, had recently secured a permit to carry a firearm, ran from the police after a stop and was shot. He died on the scene. The local police chief said that an officer’s body-camera video showed Sylville Smith with a gun in his hand and turning towards the police. While more details will emerge in the coming days about Smith and the officer who shot him, our attention has been captured by the clashes between police and residents of the Sherman Park neighborhood, where Smith was killed, who gathered shortly after his death. The shooting may have been the catalyst for the protest and property damage, but as any native black Milwaukeean can tell you, what’s happened here is bigger than any one incident.
Milwaukee is one of the most segregated cities in the country. It’s one of the first things you learn as a black child there. I don’t think you can understand rust belt communities without looking at the lack of funding for services, such as transportation infrastructure and housing, that undergirds the concentrated poverty in place like Sherman Park, and the entire north side, where I grew up. Milwaukee has the largest black population in the state, and the poverty rate for blacks living in Milwaukee is 32.9% (in 2014, it was 14.5% nationwide). What local, striving black folks often talk about is the fact that jobs exist in places they can’t reach and that rent and house prices often prevent them from moving closer. 
Governor Scott Walker’s contribution to these circumstances has been considerable. According to one report, “for more than 20 years, he has fought proposals that would make it easier for city residents” to get to suburban job centers. He opposed proposals from city mayors for “an urban-suburban light rail line” and shortened or eliminated regional bus routes that cut off access to tens of thousands of jobs. It was only because of a lawsuit that Walker agreed to set aside a meager $14m of a $1.7bn highway project to fund bus routes to the suburbs.
These economic pressures coexist with tensions between police and black citizens, which have been ever present since large numbers of southern black families migrated to the city nearly 60 years ago. In 2014, the police shooting of Dontre Hamilton served as a reminder to black Milwaukee that a kind of reckoning and repair was urgently needed. Months after Hamilton’s death, jurors determined that two Milwaukee police officers had to pay $506,000 to Leo Hardy for an illegal strip search.
I think there’s an oversimplified narrative about what makes it right or wrong for a community that believes itself under siege to resist, act out, protest, riot. Some will undoubtedly dwell on Smith’s arrest record. Americans will get behind victims of police violence if they appear to be blameless. There’s a comfort in embracing a binary of “good” and “bad”. One does not have to think too deeply about history, patterns, or injustices. One doesn’t have to consider the policies that actually created the conditions for his pain. Smith’s death was a spark to a powder keg built up decades before he was killed Saturday night.
In an interview, the brother of Sylville Smith expressed his pain and frustration in the most direct terms: “if you don’t have anyone to protect us, then this is what you get. You get a lot people that’s hurt and they can’t vent the right way.” My hometown has been in crisis for decades and perhaps now, finally, the nation is listening. 
• This article was amended on 16 August 2016 to remove a line stating that Sylville Smith was shot in the back. He was shot in the chest and arm, and it has not yet been confirmed whether he was also shot in the back. Added on 17 August 2016 was the local police chief’s statement that an officer’s body-camera video showed Sylville Smith with a gun in his hand and turning towards police.

