I grew up in an ex-mining community in the Welsh valleys; many in my family were once miners. By the time I was born in 1993 the local economy had already been devastated by Thatcher. I was brought up by my single mother who struggled to make ends meet and took whatever work she could. My dad was abusive and usually unemployed so money never came from him. Instead, we relied on support from my grandmother, great-grandmother and the tight-knit community around us. Even with this support, my brother and I never had as much as the people around us, and it was hardly a well-off area.

I left primary school unable to spell or do basic arithmetic, and was immediately put in the bottom sets in my secondary school. Things turned around when I moved in with my grandparents. This new stability at home made all the difference and I was able to get the grades I needed to get into Edinburgh University. I was lucky: I received the maximum student funding, and secured a bursary on top of that.

I was always political. If you’re from the valleys it’s hard not to be. Like many around us my family were Labour supporters and my grandfather was chair of the local Labour Party. But I was never inspired by the mainstream parties. I could see that the Blair government was an improvement on the Tories before him but it wasn’t enough. The Tories devastated my community and my family, and after 13 years in government Labour failed to put it right. They made some improvements, of course, but they didn’t reverse the decline. And when the Tories came back into power in 2010 much of that good work was undone in a few short years.

My attitude to party politics changed with Jeremy Corbyn. For the first time in my life the ideas that I hold about society, about justice, about equality, were finally getting the attention they deserved. I don’t want business-as-usual more-of-the-same politics, I want to change society. I don’t want to live in a world where communities are thrown on the scrap-heap on the whims of ‘the market’. I want to fight for a world where people come before profit, and where the rights of working people to have a decent life come before the rights of billionaires to buy third and fourth yachts. That’s why I joined Jeremy Corbyn’s Labour.

And when I speak to people in Merthyr my thoughts are echoed right back at me. So many people have found hope where they thought there was none. My grandfather – the chair of his Labour Party before I was born – left the Labour Party under Blair and rejoined under Corbyn.

So I find it hard to reconcile the claims that Corbyn supporters are all middle class with my own experiences. Jeremy Corbyn’s ideas represent the best in the history of the Labour movement and working class politics. What exactly is middle class about demanding equality and challenging unaccountable elites?

The most ridiculous claims made about Jeremy Corbyn







11 show all The most ridiculous claims made about Jeremy Corbyn



















1/11 He called Hezbollah and Hamas ‘friends’ True. In a speech made to the Stop the War Coalition in 2009, Mr Corbyn called representatives from both groups “friends” after inviting them to Parliament. He later told Channel 4 he wanted both groups, who have factions designated as international terror organisations, to be “part of the debate” for the Middle East peace process. “I use (the word ‘friends’) in a collective way, saying our friends are prepared to talk,” he added. “Does it mean I agree with Hamas and what it does? No. Does it mean I agree with Hezbollah and what they do? No.” Reuters

2/11 ‘Jeremy Corbyn thinks the death of Osama bin Laden was a tragedy’ Partly false. David Cameron used this as a line of attack at the Conservative Party conference but appears to have left out all context from Mr Corbyn’s original remarks. In an 2011 interview on Iranian television, the then-backbencher said the fact the al-Qaeda leader was not put on trial was the tragedy, continuing: “The World Trade Center was a tragedy, the attack on Afghanistan was a tragedy, the war in Iraq was a tragedy.”

3/11 He is ‘haunted’ by the legacy of his ‘evil’ great-great-grandfather False. A Daily Express exposé revealed that the Labour leader’s ancestor, James Sargent, was the “despotic” master of a Victorian workhouse. Addressing the report at the Labour conference, Mr Corbyn said he had never heard of him before, adding: “I want to take this opportunity to apologise for not doing the decent thing and going back in time and having a chat with him about his appalling behaviour.”

4/11 Jeremy Corbyn raised a motion about ‘pigeon bombs’ in Parliament This one is true. On 21 May 2004, Mr Corbyn raised an early day motion entitled “pigeon bombs”, proposing that the House register being “appalled but barely surprised” that MI5 reportedly proposed to load pigeons with explosives as a weapon. The motion continued: “The House… believes that humans represent the most obscene, perverted, cruel, uncivilised and lethal species ever to inhabit the planet and looks forward to the day when the inevitable asteroid slams into the earth and wipes them out thus giving nature the opportunity to start again.” It was not carried.

5/11 He rides a Communist bicycle False. A report in The Times referred to Mr Corbyn, known for his cycling, riding a “Chairman Mao-style bicycle” earlier this year. “Less thorough journalists might have referred to it as just a bicycle, but no, so we have to conclude that whenever we see somebody on a bicycle from now on, there goes another supporter of Chairman Mao,” he later joked.

6/11 'Jeremy Corbyn will appoint a special minister for Jews' False so far. The Sun report in December was allegedly based on a “rumour” passed to the paper by a Daily Express columnist who has written pieces critical of the Labour leader in the past. The minister did not materialise in his shadow cabinet.

7/11 ‘Jeremy Corbyn wishes Britain would abolish its Army’ False. Another gem from The Sun took comments made at a Hiroshima remembrance parade in August 2012 where Mr Corbyn supported Costa Rica’s move to abolish it armed forces. “Wouldn’t it be wonderful if every politician around the world…abolished the army and took pride in the fact that they don’t have an army,” he added. The caveat that “every politician” must take the step suggests Mr Corbyn does not support UK disarmament just yet.

8/11 Jeremy Corbyn stole sandwiches meant for veterans False. The Guido Fawkes blog claimed that the Labour leader took sandwiches meant for veterans at at Battle of Britain memorial service in September but a photo later emerged showing him being handed one by Costa volunteers, who later confirmed they were given to all guests.

9/11 He missed the induction into the Queen’s privy council True. After much speculation about Mr Corbyn’s republican views and willingness to bow to the monarch, his office confirmed that he did not attend the official induction to the privy council because of a prior engagement, but did not rule out joining the body.

10/11 Jeremy Corbyn refuses to sing the national anthem. Partly true. The Labour leader was filmed standing in silence as God Save the Queen was sung at a Battle of Britain remembrance service but will reportedly sing it in future. Mr Corbyn was elusive on the issue in an interview, saying he would show memorials “respect in the proper way”, but sources said he would sing the anthem at future occasions.

11/11 He is a member of the All-Party Parliamentary Group for Cheese True. The group lists its purpose as the following: “To increase awareness of issues surrounding the dairy industry and focus on economic issues affecting the dairy industry and producers.”

I only joined the Labour Party in the last six months. This means that the decision of the National Executive Committee (NEC) yesterday will exclude me from voting in the upcoming leadership election; that is, unless I am willing to stump up £25 in the next few days on top of my membership fees. These are the same people who claim that Jeremy’s ideas are a middle class indulgence who are preventing people like me from voting in the leadership election. How can they justify this?

Corbyn’s opponents want to make this leadership election all about him. But it’s much bigger than one man – however decent and principled he is. This is about hope. Growing up in the valleys we were told to give up. I thought that my best chance for a positive future was to get out. But now, thanks to Jeremy Corbyn and the movement behind him, working class people have hope for a better world. After three decades of despair, we’re not going to give up on that lightly.