
Brazil is ready to do the Games as they have never been done before. Tonight, at the opening ceremony of the first ever Olympic Games in South America, the eyes of the world will be on Rio.
For the next two weeks, more than 10,500 athletes from 206 countries (as well as a refugee team) will compete in 42 world championships over 17 days in front of a global audience of 5 billion people. It’s no small challenge and Rio will rise to the occasion.
Does Brazil need the Games? We believe we do, for three reasons: to improve, to prove we are capable, and to forge a spirit of unity.
In recent years it has become an Olympic sport for the media to place a microscopic lens on host cities’ problems prior to sporting events, and take a pessimistic tone. Read some of the recent international media coverage and you may be led to believe that Rio 2016 is an impending disaster.
In fact, preparations have been on time and kept to a tight budget. The athletes are enjoying the venues, the 44 test events have been a success, the Olympic flame is coming to the end of its 95-day journey inspiring the country, and the organising committee has not spent a single cent of public money in the process. We are not perfect: we had teething issues in the Olympic village. But we learn from our mistakes and become better for them.
Seven years ago, when Rio won the bid to host this year’s Games, Brazil was enjoying a prosperous and optimistic moment. Today, it is living a worst-case scenario in terms of its political and economic crises combined with a global health scare.
However, through adversity arrives opportunity, and we strongly believe that the Games can be an antidote to the doom and gloom. The Olympics can lift the national mood, unite the population behind outstanding athletes and show the very best of Brazil. As Nelson Mandela said: “Sport has the power to change the world. It has the power to inspire. It has the power to unite people in a way that little else does. It speaks to youth in a language they understand. Sport can create hope where once there was only despair.” And he was a man who knew about unity and inspiration.
The economic reality has forced us to find original solutions, take creative decisions and re-evaluate the must-have essentials from the nice-to-have luxuries. We have “trimmed the fat” to create a leaner Games without excesses or white elephants.
Like any major world city, Rio has its share of problems. It’s fair to say that when it fought for the bid against its illustrious opponents – Chicago, Madrid and Tokyo – it was our city’s weaknesses, not strengths, that made it stand out. The Games provide an opportunity to bring positive benefits for the long-term future of Cariocas, as Rio residents are known.
During the campaign, we promised to deliver passion and transformation. Passion and warmth come naturally to Cariocas. The Games are also a catalyst for important developments across the city. For every one Brazilian real invested in Olympic venues, five reals are spent on legacy projects. When the time comes to look back, there will be a Rio before the Games, and a new, much improved Rio after.
Because of the Games, the city will be connected like never before with the introduction of a new metro line, four new bus lines, a light train network, an improved airport and new roads. This is alongside a redeveloped port area, 70 new hotels and a sporting infrastructure for future generations to enjoy. The handball arena, built using nomadic architecture, will be reconstructed to create four new schools for 2,000 children following the Games.
Aside from the physical developments, Brazilians will also feel the benefits in less tangible ways. Almost one third of the Brazilian population is under 19 – the Rio 2016 education programme has reached 5 million young people. As part of this, more than a million are being taught English as a second language – the largest scheme of its kind in the world. The 50,000 Olympics volunteers are being upskilled ready to fill the thousands of new jobs being created.
Once the final medal is hung around the neck of the last champion athlete, and the curtain drawn on the closing ceremony, we are sure that Brazilians will look back on Rio 2016 with pride. The world will remember the first ever Games in South America for its passion and celebration. Meanwhile, Cariocas will look forward to a brighter future in the cidade maravilhosa, with memories to last a lifetime.

