Why has France become such a persistent target for jihadist assault?

There is a temptation, both inside and outside the country to suggest that France, and successive French governments, may be partly to blame. This hides a darker reality.

The truck attack which slaughtered 84 people in Nice was the third mass killing in France in 17 months. There have also been a cluster of other, “smaller” incidents which were broadly jihadist in nature.

A senior police officer and his wife were murdered in their home in a western Paris suburb last month. A truck driver beheaded his boss and rammed a chemical plant near Lyon 13 months ago.

There was also a man who tried to attack a police station near Tours with a long knife; a man who was shot dead when he approached a Paris police station wearing a fake explosives belt; another incident in which a motorist rammed and injured pedestrians; a man who shot himself in the foot after kidnapping and murdering a young woman. He was planning, it is believed, to attack a church south of Paris.

The victims of the Nice attack

In several incidents – including the attack in Nice – there are reasons to question the sanity and doubt the coherent political motives of the attackers. Were they sincere jihadists or depressive psychotics?

This distinction is misleading.

There are plausible reasons to “explain” why France is under persistent attack. France has the largest Muslim population in Europe, about 4,700,000 people, many of whom are non-practising.

France is the biggest single foreign recruiting ground for Isis. About 2,000 young French men and women have travelled to join the “caliphate” in Syria and Iraq, some of them rising to senior positions.

France has a violent and complex history of entanglement and colonisation in North Africa and the Middle East. Since the 2005 suburban riots, little has been done to make second and third generation Muslim youths feel French.

France’s ostentatiously secular state has generated conflicts with even moderate Muslim opinion: the ban on head-scarves in schools; the public ban on burkas; the aggressive anti-clericalism of Charlie Hebdo.

The existence of a powerful, xenophobic far-right, and racist elements on the centre-right, builds tensions with their anti-Muslim, not just anti-Islamist, rhetoric.

There are also grave doubts about the quality of France’s security and intelligence services. A damning parliamentary report last week pointed out that France has four internal security services (including one for Paris alone) but no central anti-terrorism agency.

A botched attempt by former President Nicolas Sarkozy to rationalise this mess made things worse by scrapping much of the plodding, grass-roots, internal intelligence-gathering which Britain boasts that it has perfected.

In pictures: Bastille Day Nice attack







30 show all In pictures: Bastille Day Nice attack

























































1/30 A man reacts near bouquets of flowers near the scene where a truck ran into a crowd at high speed killing scores and injuring more who were celebrating the Bastille Day national holiday in Nice Reuters

2/30 A woman arrives with a toy and a bouquet of flowers as people pay tribute near the scene where a truck ran into a crowd in Nice Reuters

3/30 A woman reacts as she places flowers in front of the memorial set on the 'Promenade des Anglais' where the truck crashed into the crowd during the Bastille Day celebrations in Nice EPA

4/30 People gather to view the floral tributes near the site of the truck attack in the French resort city of Nice AP

5/30 A man reacts near bouquets of flowers as people pay tribute near the scene where a truck ran into a crowd at high speed killing scores and injuring more who were celebrating the Bastille Day national holiday, in Nice Reuters

6/30 Floral tributes are laid out near the site of the truck attack in the French resort city of Nice AP

7/30 A child's toy is placed among the floral tributes laid out near the site of the truck attack in the French resort city of Nice AP

8/30 Investigators continue at the scene near the heavy truck that ran into a crowd at high speed killing scores who were celebrating the Bastille Day in Nice Reuters

9/30 Crime scene investigators work on the 'Promenade des Anglais' after the truck crashed into the crowd during the Bastille Day celebrations in Nice EPA

10/30 A forensic expert examines dead bodies covered with a blue sheet on the Promenade des Anglais seafront in the French Riviera city of Nice Getty Images

11/30 A forensic expert evacuates a dead body on the Promenade des Anglais seafront in the French Riviera city of Nice, after a gunman smashed a truck into a crowd of revellers celebrating Bastille Day Getty Images

12/30 A man reacts as he sits near a French flag along the beachfront the day after a truck ran into a crowd at high speed killing scores celebrating the Bastille Day in Nice Reuters

13/30 Discarded items are left on the beach, not far from the site of the truck attack in the French resort city of Nice AP

14/30 Bullet holes in the windscreen of the lorry that was driven into the crowd at high speed Reuters

15/30 A man walks through debris on the street in Nice, France, the morning after a lorry ran into a crowd, killing at least 84 and injuring 50 Reuters

16/30 Rescue workers help an injured woman to get in a ambulance AFP/Getty Images

17/30 Authorities investigate a truck after it plowed through Bastille Day revelers in the French resort city of Nice, France AP

18/30 Celebrations of Bastille Day were targeted by the lorry driver AP

19/30 People cross the street with their hands on thier heads as a French soldier secures the area after at least 84 people were killed along the Promenade des Anglais in Nice Reuters

20/30 A paramedic attends one of the dozens of people injured in the Nice Bastille Day attack

21/30 Soldiers march on street where the lorry crashed into the crowd REUTERS

22/30 A man sits next to a body seen on the ground after at least 84 people were killed in Nice, when a truck ran into a crowd celebrating the Bastille Day national holiday Reuters

23/30 Bodies are seen on the ground after at least 84 people were killed in Nice, when a truck ran into a crowd celebrating the Bastille Day national holiday Reuters

24/30 Children were among the 84 killed in the atrocity, with around 50 more hospitalised Reuters

25/30 French Interior Minister Bernard Cazeneuve (2nd L) speaks to the media in Nice AFP/Getty Images

26/30 A man walks with his hands up as police officers carry out checks on people in the centre of French Riviera town of Nice AFP/Getty Images

27/30 With injured people laying in the street police and onlookers react near to a truck in Nice AP

28/30 Police officers, firefighters and rescue workers are seen at the site of the attack AFP/Getty Images

29/30 Police officers speak with a soldier after a truck that ploughed into a crowd leaving a fireworks display in the French Riviera town of Nice AFP/Getty Images

30/30 Police shine a light into the cab as they approach the driver's cab of a truck, in Nice AP

None of this entirely explains or encompasses the nature of the threat now facing France – and not just France. It would be foolish for any western country to believe that they are sheltered from “another Nice”. The best internal intelligence in the world could not have foretold that Mohamed Bouhlel would flip from minor crime, domestic violence and road rage to callous mass slaughter.

One of France’s foremost experts on the Arab world and jihadism, Gilles Kepel, warns that the western world faces a new and unpredictable form of jihadist offensive. He traces a decision made by Islamic State two years ago to turn away from well-organised and well-funded attacks such as 9/11, or even the 13 November assault on Paris.

This new “jihadist software”, he says, centres on random attacks by disturbed or floundering individuals who are influenced – often outside direct Isis control – to make sense of their failed lives by killing “miscreants”. The preferred means, specifically listed by Isis propaganda, are not guns or explosives but banal, everyday weapons such as stones or knives or cars or trucks.

France, Mr Kepel suggests, has been picked as the softest initial target for this strategy. The aim is to create widespread panic and racial suspicion – the conditions for a non-Muslim v Muslim civil war, and not just in France.

Beyond a few fanatics, France, both Muslim and non-Muslim, has resisted the engrenage (spiral) of hatred which Isis seeks.

For how long?