
At her first press conference in the week following that July Saturday night where Malcolm Turnbull stood before the voters ashen faced at the Sofitel, briefly contemplating his own political mortality, enraged at the very prospect of something so divergent from the life plan, Hanson was, reassuringly, the Hanson of old.
It was like we’d all peeled back the lid of the tin at the back of the cupboard marked 1998 and there she was, perfectly preserved in aspic. Those piercing eyes, cornflower blue. The flaming hair. The quaver in the voice. The righteous jut of the jaw. The stupendous scale of the feelings. The manifest disdain for facts and evidence.
Pauline Hanson strode across the grass in Brisbane, spotlight trained on her, rugged up in a brightly coloured winter coat against a Queensland winter little more vengeful than a gentle breeze, ready to be disdained by the working press, a familiar ritual which that only endears the One Nation leader to her rusted-on supporters: plucky Pauline, giving those pricks of journos a good kicking. Go Pauline. You show ’em love. The Kimbos and the Himbos deserve everything they get.
The Brisbane journalists didn’t hesitate before getting stuck in, ripping her xenophobic, incoherent, noxious manifesto apart, question after question. Pauline Hanson just raised her jaw an inch or two higher and sailed on, a battleship of righteousness, with the flotsam holding on gamely, flapping against the hull. Watching the show back at my desk in Canberra, I had the clear view of the disconnected spectator. Here was Pauline, being pecked relentlessly by a mob of magpies. Like Donald Trump in America, attacks –and that’s what that press conference would look like to a person only glancing up periodically to peruse the show – are likely to make her stronger.




Pauline Hanson is back, and it's still just as hard to counter her rhetoric with facts




Why is this? Understanding that requires referencing the various reasons why she’s back. Hanson’s and One Nation’s success in 2016 is are in part about a double dissolution election (although Pauline’s Hanson’s personal support eclipses that), in part because the popular media has done a superb job of keeping Pauline Hanson in the spotlight as a quasi-political celebrity, partly because she appealed to voters Malcolm Turnbull spent zero time in the campaign talking to – the people stuck in the old economy with zero prospects of finding themselves recruited by Microsoft.
I also think the strength of her showing is also about registering a gesture. She is a totem of the disdain many voters feel for politics as usual. Pauline Hanson is a raised middle digit on the floor of the Australian Senate. If the political class in Canberra rounds collectively on the stranger in its midst, deploys the blunt instruments of gotcha and when did you stop beating your wife, this will only confirm the worst fears of some deeply alienated voters that the system is rigged permanently against the interests of the people, that politics is about elites protecting their own patches. 
As John Howard noted in early July, treating Hanson as a “scorned species” is a monumental mistake. It expresses disdain for her supporters, who have as much right as anyone else to have their interests represented in parliament, and it ultimately plays into her studied depiction of herself as put-upon outsider, which is the dynamic on which she trades.
Understanding Hanson’s context is simple enough. But we face another challenge. The problem is not so much comprehending Pauline. Her shtick is now reasonably familiar. The contemporary problem is how we engage constructively with Hansonism, and by constructively I actually mean deconstructively, which is our core business as journalists: calling out the snake oil, attempting to protect people from being manipulated. 
Just as strategists have had to evolve their core methodologies as voters have evolved, journalists have to understand that the rules of our game are being rewritten as well. We have to understand that we now practise professionally in a post-truth environment, where increasingly, our audiences can increasingly choose to exist comfortably inside bubbles, selecting only the information and commentary that reinforces their views, rejecting other material.
The problem we have in facing up to the more toxic and corrosive elements of Hansonism in 2016 (as opposed to the more orderly times in 1998) is that facts just don’t seem to matter as much as they once did. My innate respect for facts and reason and evidence remained largely intact until I watched the dynamic around Donald Trump play out during America’s gruelling primary season. 
I watched in horrified fascination from another hemisphere as the collective might of America’s greatest newspapers turned their guns on the nativist king, not with random take-downs, or savage hit jobs, but just with forensic journalism: countering Trump’s inflammatory nonsense with facts, and logic, and careful interrogation—all with no visible impact on Trump’s approval ratings.
I know enough of my own eco-system, the world of national affairs that intersects between includes news publications, comments, threads and social media, to know that political conversation increasingly feels like a giant exercise in confirmation bias. A great many people still consume their politics passively and genially, with a healthy dose of scepticism and a genuinely open and enquiring mind, but there is also an increasingly rancorous cohort of political consumers who reject vehemently any information that does not reinforce their existing belief structure. 
This cohort feels the whole media-political superstructure is lying to them and manipulating them, and countering this belief with exhaustive explanation sometimes only escalates the feelings of rage. More lies. More manipulations.








  

One Nation’s Pauline Hanson poses for a photo with Malcolm Roberts, number two on her senate ticket, during her election-night function in Ipswich, west of Brisbane, Saturday, 2 July, 2016. Ms Hanson last held office as the federal member for Oxley in 1998. Photograph: Dan Peled/AAP


We can’t ignore these cultural trends, and we can’t ignore the gap between how we see ourselves and how some of our readers see us. Journalists see ourselves as honest brokers, professional nit-pickers, pursuing the business of fact-checking and accountability, standing as an institutional check on executive overreach. 
We work ferociously hard, harder than we have ever worked, and for leisure we go to films like Spotlight and feel good about ourselves and our truth-to-power mission. A great chunk of our audience still respects what we do, bless them. But another chunk sees us quite differently. They view the media as being the tame house pets of a busted political system; part of the jig, which that is now well and truly up. 
Katharine Viner, the editor in chief of the Guardian, captured these developments wonderfully well in a recent essay about how technology has disrupted the truth:




 

Now, we are caught in a series of confusing battles between opposing forces: between truth and falsehood, fact and rumour, kindness and cruelty; between the few and the many, the connected and the alienated; between the open platform of the web as its architects envisioned it and the gated enclosures of Facebook and other social networks; between an informed public and a misguided mob.
What is common to these struggles—and what makes their resolution an urgent matter—is that they all involve the diminishing status of truth. This does not mean that there are no truths. It simply means, as this year has made very clear, that we cannot agree on what those truths are, and when there is no consensus about the truth and no way to achieve it, chaos soon follows.


Practising journalism in a post-fact environment is, in a way, more of an existential threat for journalism than technological change. Our whole function in a democracy does rest on an assumption that facts have broad-based currency, that there are shared principles around which societies can coalesce and public interest can be served. To discover that the power of agreed facts is on the wane is, professionally, like losing your moorings. 
Intuiting the seeming inevitability of the post-fact, post-truth world, is a bit like enduring a head-on collision with the certainty of your own redundancy: what if, structurally, societally, journalism can no longer speak truth to power because no-one cares about us speaking truth to power any more, because no-one trusts us either?
For the working journalist (as opposed to the working cypher for an undisclosed agenda, or working propagandist for their employer or their latest political paramour, or the non-working non-caring non-functioning hack), there really is no greater horror, because we know that journalism still matters. We know this, not as some statement of narcissism, as some abstract claim of entitlement, as some crotchety articulation of Paradise Lost, as some undignified foot stamp about our lost influence – we know it because the working journalist inhabits the same universe that powerful people inhabit.
We are not of that universe, but we enjoy privileged sightlines on it, enough to know that lies get told, sometimes monstrous ones, that corruption happens, that self-interest can often trump the greater good and the national interest. We know that the public does needs us to stand vigilant, sometimes as more threat than promise, as a structural check on bad behaviour, not because we deserve that honour, but because we have been conditioned our whole careers to serve the public, and most of us are intent on doing that for as long as someone will fund journalism.
I know, for example, that the following statement from Pauline Hanson’s manifesto is a statement unsupported by evidence: “Multiculturalism has failed everywhere. It is negative and divisive, a weight that is drowning our once safe and cohesive society.” I know the proposed prescription for the problem is first, impossible and second, inflammatory, exhibiting the sort of sentiments that have in the grand sweep of history led great powers into destructive conflicts. 
“One Nation will abolish multiculturalism and the Racial Discrimination Act and promote assimilation, nationalism, loyalty and pride in being an Australian.” This statement resonates with some people, particularly the losers of globalisation, but if you interrogate it it’s about as meaningful as placing a drive-through order at McDonald’s: could I have the McHappy Meal with a side of jingoism? Could I scapegoat someone else to feel better about myself and my prospects? Could we just send all the foreigners back home?
But in order to call out the falsehoods and dissembles and false comforts, we have to be trusted by our audiences, and we have to be self-aware enough to understand that at least some of our audiences now think that most of us are no better than the people we purport to keep honest: that we are all part of the same stinking, creaking, self-referential system that is increasingly cloaked in odium.
I’ve reported every federal election since 1996. I’ve never lived through an election cycle where media commentary mattered less than in the 2016 campaign. Neither major-party leader felt any great pressure to subject themselves to rigorous interviews. News Corporation’s Daily Telegraph whipped itself into a frenzy about the evils of Labor day after day, loyally putting down progressivism in all its forms – and the result of all the histrionics and all the dire predictions of Armageddon from Ray Hadley and his ilk was a positive swing to Labor in the Telegraph heartland in Australia’s most populous state. Take that, Rupert, said the good voters of New South Wales.
Part of the declining cultural relevance of the mainstream media is due to forces entirely beyond our control. It’s predominantly technological change, which has allowed consumers to access their own information without the pesky middle-people – and again, technology, allowing public figures to communicate with voters directly without the media filter. But if we think that’s all it is we are deluding ourselves. We have to look in the mirror. Our intemperate excesses have also discounted our moral value. Our own behaviour has helped fuel a lack of trust, which leads inevitably to an erosion of our core mandate.




The most troubling thing about Pauline Hanson's view of Muslims? The facts no longer matter | Susan Carland




And when we have discounted our own currency, how then can we help ensure that voters aren’t manipulated by a new mob of charlatans: the nostalgia merchants and the new protectionists, and the xenophobes, and the reflexive nationalists, and the populists who proliferate and prosper in truthiness, and the people who lied to the voters in Britain to help generate the Brexit vote, to faux everymen like such as Donald Trump, who thinks politics is not about service but about publicity and about trolling the world?
I don’t see an easy solution to the current impasse. But I suspect the way back is through understanding rather than glib judgment, and through resisting the temptation to style a genuine crisis of civic integrity as an abstract culture war between elites and people too foolish to understand their own interests – as if that binary, reductionist view of the problem was anything other than a cheap framing device to structure yet another hot take on a complex phenomenon in time for deadline.
From a journalist’s perspective it does involve understanding Pauline Hanson and the context sitting behind her resurgence. That doesn’t mean white-washing her manifestly intolerable positions. It doesn’t mean excusing her, or launching apologias, or finding reasons why she’s terribly misunderstood: “some of my best friends are Paulines”.
It means looking her directly in the eye. It means comprehending her and the voters she represents. It means acknowledging that there are people who vote for Pauline Hanson because they are afraid of the future for entirely rational reasons, because governments have failed to give them hope for the future, and we need to acknowledge that perhaps part of the reason politicians have been insufficiently attentive to the losers is because journalists – under pressure, battling shrinking newsrooms, unable to get out into the field – haven’t done enough to tell their stories.
This is an edited extract of an essay that appears in the spring issue of Meanjin, out 15 September. RRP $24.99, eBook $9.99

