
Perhaps everyone who read comments from the Czech president, Miloš Zeman, published in the Guardian yesterday, concluded that the chain-smoking 71-year-old is an exceptionally distasteful man. His objection to accepting Muslim refugees, and urging Czechs to arm themselves against a possible “super-Holocaust”, is not even the worst example of the president’s obtuseness.
A few examples. On the International Students’ Day on 17 November, which commemorates the closing of Czech universities by the Nazis in 1939, Zeman shared a platform with a Czech far-right party. And of the Czech Friends of the Earth, award-winning nature conservationists trying to protect a national park from illegal logging, he said he would treat them in a “good old medieval way: burn them, piss on them and salt them”. He really does make Nigel Farage look like a nice guy.
While comparison to the British far-right populist holds well in many respects, there is a larger question to answer. Why on earth would a nation – represented on the dawn of its freedom 25 years ago by the universally popular figure of Václav Havel – elect as its president such a moron?




 

We have to face the harsh reality: European post-communist countries have failed to build a decent type of democracy




 

To find a correct answer we have to recognise that Zeman is alone neither in the Czech Republic nor in the region of the post-communist EU member states. Rather, he is a vulgar version of the populists who have emerged across the region as its new political leadership. Think of Poland’s Jarosław Kaczyński, Viktor Orbán in Hungary or Robert Fico in Slovakia. In the Czech Republic, we also have the dangerous oligarch, media and agro-business tycoon and minister of finance, Andrej Babiš.
With their authoritarian style and fanning of hatred towards minorities and refugees, they all stand as evidence to the story of the failed transformations of the post-communist countries. We have to face the harsh reality: the central European post-communist countries have failed to build a decent type of democracy, and most of them are in acute danger of slipping into authoritarian regimes.
People by and large do not feel represented by the political parties. This is often explained by the fact that substantial parts of the leadership of post-communist political parties have participated in institutionalised corruption. But perhaps even more important is the fact that all of the parties have advocated the neoliberal capitalism most people have come to see as a political and economic system that makes their lives worse.
In central Europe, you could even conclude that neoliberal capitalism has encouraged corruption by declaring that everything should have its price tag. If “everything”, why not state decisions? Why not university degrees or public offices? It has been proved that all of those assets have been the subject of murky trades in the Czech Republic’s recent past.
Only when we realise this can we explain Czech society’s deep disgust with post-communist politics, and the opportunities for the strong populist figures who pretend they will defend society against whatever may come.




Miloš Zeman: the hardline Czech leader fanning hostility to refugees




But this crisis of political representation is not confined to the east. It partly explains Brexit, the emergence of movements such as Podemos or Syriza, and Jeremy Corbyn’s transformation of Labour. The left movement in eastern Europe was totally demolished by communism, and all attempts to establish progressive social movements are still struggling with that stigma.
Thus the new wave of central European populism comes with rightwing methods of escalating hatred; even if, as in the case of Zeman and Fico, they claim to have a leftist background. The situation should be worrying for all of the Europe. Central Europe is on the way to become once again a chaotic place of mutually competing nationalisms and geopolitical struggles. If this dystopian future for the region is to be averted, it would require a broad-minded EU strategy to fix and deepen the democracies in the region.
While “broad-minded EU strategy” might sound like an oxymoron to many, the situation is too serious for the EU not to even attempt it. Is it possible? Or can we Czechs manage to defeat hateful populism ourselves? While there are many who will not stop trying, it is only fair to accept the situation is even worse than it was immediately after the fall of communism, when the future looked so bright and promising.

