
Systemically, 2016 has been a tragic time for women in the criminal justice system. A combination of political, legal and social factors has contributed to the now 2,876 female prisoners in Australia, with the number rising at an unprecedented rate, twice as fast as for men.
Is this the result of ice-crazed women rampaging our streets committing heinous acts? No, it’s not. Crime in our community has in fact decreased and for the most part women are being convicted for minor, non-violent offences.
Having once been there myself, and now working to support those in the system, I can assure you that it’s a terrible and deteriorating climate. My experiences are significantly different to those of my clients only because I broke the same laws in a different era. In truth, the system has never been completely fair, but somewhere along the way we allowed it to worsen. We allowed our policies to ostracise and stigmatise our community’s most vulnerable and traumatised women. 




Why we should close women's prisons and treat their crimes more fairly | Mirko Bagaric




I manage the Women in Prison Advocacy Network (WIPAN), an organisation dedicated to advancing the prospects and wellbeing of women affected by the criminal justice system. We mentor such women, and they refer to us as “their voice”. It’s not our vast range of academic qualifications that crowned us with this title, although we have them; this job requires respect, trust and mutual understanding.
Who I once was made me the person I am today, and who I am today makes me the kind of worker capable of delivering a compassionate and acutely aware service, underpinned by a complete absence of judgment. It is this grassroots approach that transforms lives and proves that we can indeed turn the prison numbers around.
My clients present to me the kind of torture that is the spitting image of my past. I was addicted to heroin, back when heroin was the equivalent of ice. I met all the appalling stereotypes. My value for life deteriorated so dramatically that pondering my departure from this world was the only time I felt a sense of peace and relief. I carelessly flirted with death for two and a half years and for some unknown reason I woke up after every overdose still alive and kicking. I wasted hundreds of dollars a day just to feel normal – not high, just well enough to walk. Every day I was faced with my Catch 22 – find the money and risk being caught, or don’t find the money and endure the torture. Sure enough, I got caught. 
To me, I was an extremely ill young woman who eventually became a criminal. According to our law, I was just a criminal. Denied bail, I was thrown some green clothes and on the butcher truck I went. Fortunately, this happened in an era that afforded me something our current policies now forbid, and that was to re-apply for bail a few days later. 
I was released from prison to engage in a community diversionary program, one that would allow me to have a real crack at rehabilitation. It was an awfully intense, confronting battle and it required more courage and hard work than sitting in a cell for twelve months, but had I not been granted that opportunity I would not be the contributing member of society that I am today. 
Unbeknownst to me, simultaneous to my self-medicating behaviours, history was being made overseas as UK Labour MP, Baroness Jean Corston led a review into the many injustices affecting women in the UK. The Corston Report was evidence-based and written by a woman of significance and credibility. It was a recipe for immediate change. Forty-one of her 43 recommendations were implemented in the UK and slowly, but surely, the number of women in UK prisons began to drop. 




'The system failed her': behind a suicide spike at a California women's prison




Baroness Corston will visit Australia this week. She’ll brief our politicians on diversionary alternatives to the punitive ones that exist, and I truly hope they decide to take a leaf out of her book.
However, we should aim to not just duplicate her work, but go one step further and strengthen it so that it is long lasting, helping thousands instead of hundreds. 
There are still 3,885 women in prison in the UK – in the “troublesome” era of 2001, there were 3,740 – and over 60% of UK correctional centres have this year been deemed overcrowded, with the treatment of women being once again labeled as “inhumane”. Through changes in government, cuts in funding, and other factors, it seems much of Corston’s great work has come undone and we must learn from this. We must ensure any replications of Corston’s work are sustainable. 
Let us strive to emulate the good work in the UK and ensure that here in Australia, changes to current policy determine our future rather than just offering us a place in history.
I can confidently say that I will never again touch drugs or engage in crime. I hope in future years many more women will be able to say the same, and that our collective lessons learned will help us break this tragic cycle.

