
I have fond memories of travelling from Gerrards Cross in Buckinghamshire, near where I grew up, to London’s Marylebone station with my brother when I was young. As a wheelchair user, such events were rare but I’ve never lost the excitement of a train trip.
Excitement isn’t the word I’d use for my recent journey with Southern rail. I’m yet another victim of the atrocious service that they offer.




Southern is a story of rail failure. But the real agenda is to crush the unions | Aditya Chakrabortty




I’d seen the news reports and heard stories from the many friends, including my partner who uses the line regularly to go to London. Yet I was only travelling from Hastings to Brighton. And I’m a regular user of rail services across the country. What could possibly go wrong?
Things didn’t start well when all the information screens were broken at Hastings station – not that they are placed in a particularly helpful position for those of us who are disabled or visually impaired. Then a concerned station employee became flustered at the idea of unlocking the station ramps, which most big stations have these days. When the train arrived, concerned station employee and an icy conductor somehow between them managed the incredibly complex task of unfolding the ramp.
It was a smooth and pleasant journey to Brighton, although on arrival the icy conductor didn’t mess about waiting for someone on the platform and instead used the onboard ramps, perhaps to save time, despite the fact they are mean to use the station ramps.
After a lovely day in Brighton I headed back to the station for my return journey to Hastings at 6.45pm. It was very busy with barely any staff on hand. At the barrier, I was told to find another member of staff who could help me. Eventually the someone else approached in hi-vis. I told him I needed the next train for Hastings. Hi-vis was at least friendly. “Get on the Ashford International,” he told me. “I’ll try and grab the ramp but it’s going in the next five minutes.”




 

I was gestured unhelpfully towards a ramped walkway, then a patronising man appeared and spoke over my head




 

I scooted down to the appropriate platform where the driver was getting into his cab as he saw me. “You can’t get on here,” he said, shooting off into the train and leaving me open-mouthed. Hi-vis returned sheepishly, clutching a bit of paper. “We’ll have to send you to Lewes,” he said, “Where you’ll change. Then get the train for Ore which will pass through Hastings.”
I was anxious about having to change, but squeezed on to the Lewes train, the wheelchair space tight with cyclists and their bikes. At one point a man in his 30s got on with a baby in a buggy and we got chatting about the service. “Welcome to Southern trains,” he said. I was agog at how difficult it must be getting a buggy down and across the gap, which is sometimes considerable. “They should have sent you to Eastbourne,” he said. “It would have been easier to make the change there.”
At Lewes the conductor couldn’t wait to see the back of me. An older woman appeared carrying the ramp, grumpy that I’d been “sent to her”. I said nothing. I wanted to get back to Hastings, which clearly wasn’t going to be before 9pm. I was gestured unhelpfully towards a ramped walkway, then a patronising man appeared and spoke over my head as he put on his hi-vis. The Ore train arrived and the patronising man announced that it was a very long train, so we dashed down to the end of the platform. Patronising man positioned the ramps and left with the parting statement “they should have sent her direct to Eastbourne”.
Once in Eastbourne, for a 10-minute stop all the more frustrating knowing I could have gone there in the first place, there was confusion when it is announced they were “uncoupling” the last four carriages. As I’d been put in one of the last carriages, I was immediately in a panic. I asked my PA to stop the doors closing to make sure we could find out what this meant. After another wait, the conductor – who had left the train – got back on and we mysteriously shot off.
I finally arrived at Hastings where there was someone waiting with the ramp, meaning I could make a swift and uncomplicated exit. I got to my car in the station car park at 9.10pm. The journey should have been direct and taken one hour and six minutes.
When I contacted Southern rail about my experience, a spokesman gave the following response: “We are extremely sorry that Ms Pepper had such a bad experience while travelling with us. We will be conducting a full investigation into what went wrong and take action to ensure this does not happen again.”




Southern Railway is failing customers again and again. That’s why I spoke out | David Boyle




The improvement to services for disabled passengers has taken years of campaigning by disability activists and allies. It was only in 2010 under the Equality Act that further responsibility for transport access was addressed. EU directives have helped to ensure that disabled passengers have increased access to travel. Brexit may sound the death knell for this progress.
If you’re taking a longer journey, it is advised that you book your mobility assistance with the specific train company to ensure you receive the necessary support for your journey. For me, this is ramps at each station. I’ve done this many times, including on a trip this year to York, alighting the train without any problem at the huge and bustling King’s Cross. But I’ve also done the Hastings to Brighton trip regularly, and never needed to book ramps in advance. After all, sometimes a girl wants to travel spontaneously.
As a wheelchair user I’ve travelled on the Barcelona tube, the New York bus system and I frequently use the Overground in London. Yet this recent Southern rail experience counts as the most stressful and confusing I’ve had in a while. If there are further cuts and the removal of conductors, as has been mooted, this operator will definitely have no equality of service.

