
It’s a new school year. So, hands up all those who want working-class children to do worse at schools? Hands up who thinks the government should pick its favourite children and give them the best schools?
Unless your hands were raised way above your head for both questions, you can’t support grammar schools.
The evidence is unequivocal. In areas where grammar schools exist, poorer children get worse grades than their counterparts in those parts of the country where schools do not select. For children in middle-income or wealthy families, the existence of grammars does not make much difference either way. This means that if you bring back grammars in England, what you’re actually doing is making things worse for the most vulnerable.
I know some people won’t believe this because their experience suggests otherwise. Last week, I did a TV interview in which Tory MP Chris Philp proudly described how he and his father attended grammar schools that took his family from “Peckham to parliament in two generations”. Bully for him. But who cares? Like millions of people in England, I went to a comprehensive. My parents went to secondary moderns and got no qualifications, yet I went from Widnes to sitting alongside the gloating MP in our Westminster studio in just the one generation. Anecdotal checkmate, Philp.
Indeed, grammar attendees seem to forget that since the expansion of higher education in the 90s, this sort of story is not uncommon. The idea that you must attend a grammar to get on is simply untrue.




Would you get into grammar school? Try the 11-plus exam




Personal stories should not be the basis for policy decisions, though. England now has oodles of data on its young, with test results collected from the time children enter school until they finish at 16 or 18. We don’t have to guess whether grammars work based on data from the 60s. We can see what their impact is, right now, in the few local areas that retained them.
What the data shows is that, in England, exam results are worse in grammar areas for poor children and barely different for anyone else. It’s that simple. So, unless you really like educational inequality, grammars are a bad idea. Theresa May knew this argument would come up. Why else announce a series of alleged safeguards for poorer children, such as requiring future selective schools to take a quota of pupils on free meals or only receive permission to open in deprived areas? These sound like a decent sop to throw out, until you realise how deeply patronising they are. The government is saying – out loud – that its flagship education policy, which sets the tone for reforms to come, involves opening schools that it absolutely knows worsen results for poor kids and yet, somehow, May’s speech made it sound as if the working class should be pleased that a few of them might avoid the horrid outcomes.








  

Education policy, and the way we can measure performance, have moved on considerably since the heyday of the grammar school Photograph: Kurt Hutton/Getty Images


What will May’s unemployment reforms look like? Workhouses with a weekly lottery for a salaried office job?
“At least it will mean a chance at a good education for some children,” a radio presenter said to me as we debated the policy’s merits. At that point, I wanted to cry. Tony Blair banned grammars in 1998 because he never wanted to hear that sort of talk again. In a modern society, there should be no acceptance that all we can offer is “a chance” at a great education. There should be a forceful, unwavering pursuit of a great education – vocational and academic – for everyone. For the past 20 years at least, comprehensives have shown it can be done. What an unimaginative, broken nation we have become if we think a few people getting a shot is the best government can offer.
So why is the prime minister bringing back grammars, given that she knows they are harmful? Well, as Lynton Crosby famously advocated during the 2015 general election, when you’re losing an argument, your best course is to “throw a dead cat on the table” – everyone starts talking about the dead cat and stops talking about the thing causing a headache.
Grammar schools are a wonderful dead cat. Almost everyone has an opinion. That the proposals were put out in green paper form – as a consultation, rather than a concrete plan – suggests the government wants to eke out the distraction for as long as possible.




 

In a modern society, there should be a forceful, unwavering pursuit of great education for everyone




 

But what is May diverting attention from? The obvious answer is Brexit. But there are also ticking time bombs within education: shrinking budgets, a severe teacher shortage and the additional 750,000 places needed in the next 10 years. However, May also managed to get a not-too-subtle kicking of her posh-boy predecessors into her speech. Alongside more grammars, she proposed stricter controls on private schools, which will need to do more to support state schools to keep their charitable status. She also told universities that if they want to raise tuition fees they must sponsor schools.
The glaring message is that pandering to the elites is over. If the posh want fancy schools and expensive universities, they need to help the little people.
Again, that sounds lovely. Again, scratch the surface and it’s patronising. May pointed to examples of successful partnership but, more widely, there’s no evidence that elite groups manage schools any better than those already doing the job. Universities in Chester, Bournemouth and Liverpool all tried, and failed, to sponsor schools in the past, eventually withdrawing support. “Sometimes sponsors seem to underestimate the extent of their responsibilities and their need for dedicated involvement,” said Becky Francis, now head of the Institute of Education at UCL.
Private schools sponsoring state-funded schools have also sometimes floundered. Wellington College was Labour’s high hope for a similar project, but its new school struggled with staff turnover and poor results. And Dulwich College pulled out of its sponsorship of a school, admitting it didn’t have the staff or skills needed.
Anthony Seldon, the master of Wellington College when it took on the school, said that perhaps this is the only way to spread resources. “What is the alternative? Every country on Earth, capitalist and socialist, has elites and non-elites. To my mind, the heroes are the people who try to bridge those gaps, however hard it might be.”
Ultimately, May is right on one thing. Existing grammars, private schools and universities could do more. But opening more selective schools is, quite probably, not the way to go.

