Like a super-powered aerosol, those oddly engaging pictures of the Prime Minister on her summer hols drive away the foetid stench of rancorous recrimination which descended on post-Brexit Britain, and replace it with a blast of Alpine freshness.

This won’t endure long. Soon enough, the delicate bouquet of wild flowers will fade. But before the underfunded care-home stink of Dettol and despair returns, give thanks for the fragrant vision of Theresa and Philip May on their annual retreat in the Swiss Alps.

Rucksacks on backs, walking sticks in hands, the two clad in outfits that are touchingly identical but for the differently coloured sleeveless shirts and different shaped shades, they are a sight for the sorest of eyes.

The thrifty camping store trousers, which for some reason she wears about as high as Simon Cowell wears his slacks, could not be more unflattering if they came from one of the clown community’s least popular tailors. Since they are the right trousers for the environment, she couldn’t care less.

Theresa May says she has an ‘open mind’ over Brexit negotiations

On its own, the vacational contrast implicitly drawn with her predecessors makes you warm to May. David Cameron’s brief outings to the Cornish sands, to flash his lobster-pink torso and change-shorts beneath the Mickey Mouse towel, were transparent public relations exercises he endured purely to enable the ensuing jaunt to one of Ibiza or Tuscany’s more lavishly appointed villas.

Gordon Brown had to jettison his pre-No 10 preference for elegant New England. When the prime ministerial requirement to pander to killjoys obliged him to pad along rainy Southwold beach in a linen jacket, his sour, scrunchy face bespoke a workaholic fantasising about a national disaster to recall him to London and foreshorten the anguish.

As for Tony Blair, now that Sir John Chilcot has finished him off for good, who would be so vindictive as to list the various hospitalities he thought it seemly for a British prime minister to accept? The lounging on Silvio Berlusconi’s mega yacht, the trips to Sharm el Sheikh apparently as the guest of the cuddly Egyptian leader Hosni Mubarak, the stints at Cliff Richard’s Bajan villa?

If the holidaying Family Blair was the perfect emblem for post-millennial, gold-taps-and-private-jets Eurotrash vulgarity, May’s Alpine retreat makes her the poster girl for a much earlier age. It’s impossible to isolate the decade she and Philip bring to mind, but it is some point between the two World Wars; a time when decent, God-fearing middle-class English folk, of whichever gender, would no more flash their pinkened bodies on a beach than pop an ecstasy tab and dance until noon to the musical stylings of David Guetta.

Mature readers will fondly remember Goodbye, Mr Chips, the 1939 British film in which Robert Donat’s bashful, painfully repressed public-school classics teacher joins a colleague on a walking holiday in the (Austrian) Alps. When marooned on a mountain by enveloping fog, he comes upon the lovely Greer Garson. To his amazement he charms her to bits with his bashfulness and courtesy. They fall in love and marry, but – look away now if you don’t want to know the result – she and their baby die in childbirth.

The one incongruously glamorous detail about the Mays – who dealt with their own sadness on the reproductive front with the unflinching dignity of Donat’s Charles Chipping – is that they did not meet in an Alpine mist, but were introduced when students at Oxford by Benazir Bhutto.

Theresa May's Cabinet: Who's in – and who's out?







27 show all Theresa May's Cabinet: Who's in – and who's out?



















































1/27 Andrea Leadsom Andrea Leadsom has been appointed Secretary for Secretary of State for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs Getty Images

2/27 Priti Patel Priti Patel has been appointed International Development Secretary PA

3/27 Alun Cairns Alun Cairns will stay on as Welsh Secretary Reuters

4/27 Karen Bradley Karen Bradley is now Secretary of State for Culture, Media and Sport Rex

5/27 Greg Clark Greg Clark has been appointed Secretary of State for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy PA

6/27 James Brokenshire James Brokenshire has been appointed as Secretary of State for Northern Ireland PA

7/27 Stephen Crabb Stephen Crabb has resigned as Work and Pensions Secretary PA

8/27 Theresa Villiers Theresa Villiers will not return as Northern Ireland Secretary. She was reportedly offered a role by Theresa May, but turned it down, saying it was not one she felt could take on Getty

9/27 Chris Grayling Chris Grayling has been appointed Transport Secretary PA

10/27 Damien Green Damien Green has been appointed Work and Pensions Secretary Getty

11/27 Liz Truss Liz Truss has been appointed Justice Secretary Getty Images

12/27 Patrick McLoughlin Patrick McLoughlin who was Transport Secretary has been appointed Tory Party chairman and Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster Getty Images

13/27 Justine Greening Justine Greening has been appointed as Education Secretary Getty Images

14/27 Gavin Williamson Gavin Williamson is to become the new Government Chief Whip Reuters

15/27 Jeremy Hunt Jeremy Hunt will continue as Health Secretary Getty Images

16/27 Nicky Morgan Nicky Morgan lost her job as Education Secretary Reuters

17/27 Michael Gove Michael Gove has been sacked as Justice Secretary Reuters

18/27 John Whittingdale John Whittingdale left his job as Culture Secretary EPA

19/27 Oliver Letwin Oliver Letwin, the Chancellor for the Duchy of Lancaster, has been sacked from his role in the cabinet PA

20/27 Philip Hammond The former Foreign Secretary has been made Chancellor EPA

21/27 Boris Johnson Leading Brexit campaigner is given the role of Foreign Secretary Getty

22/27 Amber Rudd Leading Remain campaigner takes Theresa May's old job of Home Secretary PA

23/27 Michael Fallon Stays as Defence Secretary AP

24/27 Liam Fox The former Defence Secretary is named as head of new Department for International Trade PA

25/27 David Davis The former shadow Home Secretary and leadership rival to David Cameron is named Secretary of State for Leaving the European Union - aka Brexit minister PA

26/27 George Osborne Gone as Chancellor - and fails to secure any new role in May's government GETTY

27/27 David Mundell The Conservative Party's only Scottish MP retains his role as Scottish Secretary Getty Images

That detail apart, there cannot be a more reassuringly solid pairing in all the Home Counties. Nothing picks apart a dodgy relationship like a holiday. We’ve all stared with guilty pleasure at the couple spending two hours in seething silence opposite one another at a taverna or bistro. If these two, after 30 years of traversing the Alps, can not only tolerate but actively enjoy one another’s company during those endless mountain climbs, God love them for that.

As John Rentoul reports, an Independent poll discovers that May has leapfrogged Boris Johnson to become the country’s most popular politician. This portrait of her and her old man – surely the least showy Downing Street couple since Clement Attlee was driven to election hustings by his wife Violet in their rusty little car – goes part of the way to explaining why. Some atavistic reverence for non-emoting, non-freebie-hogging, fundamentally decent political leaders has clearly survived the advents of the television and internet ages.

Much of it is also explained, needless to say, by length of any new PM’s honeymoon period. That will end, and monstrous logistical challenges of Brexit, among the usual myriad of other problems, will stale the air around her.

For all that, she looks built to last. Many of us who grew up under Thatcher’s unforgiving yoke regard the act of putting a cross beside any Tory name as no less a physical impossibility than climbing an Alp without a large team of sherpas and a huge oxygen canister. Nothing will probably ever change that. But glancing at the pictures of Theresa May and the plain authenticity they seem to capture, you can glimpse at why her appeal might extend beyond the natural Tory vote.