The claim that a Brexit vote would lead to a second, and this time successful, referendum vote for Scottish independence has been widely made, and widely believed. It may indeed still happen eventually. Yet at this early stage, two months after the United Kingdom voted to leave the European Union while Scotland voted to remain, the signs that a second referendum will in fact take place remain opaque, while the result of such a vote is even more uncertain.

This week, Scotland’s first minister, Nicola Sturgeon, will start what she calls a new “national conversation” on independence. The meeting with SNP MSPs and MPs in Stirling fulfils the pledge she made in March, that there would be a new independence initiative this summer. But it comes in the wake of a Brexit result that has thrown all calculations about a second Scottish vote up in the air, where they remain.

Two years after losing Scotland’s historic 2014 referendum, Ms Sturgeon is rightly cautious about launching a second. The key reason is that a second defeat would effectively kill independence politics for the foreseeable future, as well as throw the SNP’s credibility into question. Although there is strong feeling inside the SNP and elsewhere in favour of a second vote, Ms Sturgeon cannot seriously be criticised for taking care.

The first minister has been clear that she would only blow the whistle for a return match if the opinion polls consistently showed that a substantial majority of Scottish voters were in favour of leaving the UK. That hasn’t happened yet. There was an early uptick in favour of independence following the Brexit vote in June. But a poll at the end of July showed Scottish opinion returning to the narrow anti-independence majority of 2014’s vote. As the SNP ex-minister Alex Neil said recently, the hope that a Brexit vote will push Scotland towards a yes may be a forlorn one. This reality is underlined by the Scottish government’s figures last week, showing that Scotland’s deficit is nearly £15bn, and only partly accounted for by the fall in oil prices.

Yet the biggest part of the case for caution is that Brexit itself is nowhere even close to being settled. This week Theresa May will try to hammer out some Brexit positions with her ministers at a cabinet summit at Chequers. But this is only the start of a very long process. It would therefore be highly risky for Ms Sturgeon to put an independence proposition in front of Scottish voters until the shape of the Brexit deal was clear, since so many key elements of the new independence offer to Scottish voters – currency, border controls and access to the single market among them – would be both uncertain and very different from the SNP proposition of 2014. This will frustrate Ms Sturgeon’s activists, and may encourage others to fill the gap, of which there are already signs. But the SNP has no choice.

The more urgent reality for Ms Sturgeon is in fact to help shape the Brexit deal. There is a lot up for grabs here, notably public policies like fishing where the devolved arrangements have been heavily mediated by EU policies that will not apply after the UK leaves. It’s not as exciting as a second referendum, but there is plenty at stake here, and Mrs May has claimed she is in listening mode where Scottish interests are concerned. Ms Sturgeon’s appointment of the SNP heavyweight Mike Russell to handle the Brexit talks shows she gets it, even if others remain in denial.