
In the days and months following Pauline Hanson’s maiden speech in the Senate, there will be request upon request made for the Australian “Muslim community” to respond.
From the outside looking in, such a request seems harmless, even justified. Hanson did, after all, dedicate a large majority of her address to Muslims and Islam, so it appears to be rather logical to seek a response from said community.
Unfortunately for them, journalists and news presenters are usually met with a seemingly inexplicable wall of silence from the Muslim community. It may seem frustrating to some who are seeking a “balanced” discussion, but it disguises much larger issues.




Pauline Hanson calls for immigration ban: 'Go back to where you came from'




Firstly, seeking comment from any representative on Hanson’s speech on Wednesday night ignores the fact that she doesn’t actually make any sense.
It’s one issue to try to respond to a thin veneer of logic, veiling a racist agenda, and another entirely to respond to an illogical rant. It would be challenging just to know where to start.
Furthermore, in requesting a Muslim response on Hanson, there are implications that one single person can actually represent the entire Muslim community. Very often, comment will be sought from people like the Grand Mufti or the Head of the Australian National Imam’s Council (ANIC), as though representation mimics a hierarchy.
There is no hierarchy in the Muslim community, and there is no peak body or individual who can adequately speak on behalf of the entire community. Our community is made up of a complex web of ethnicities, backgrounds, sects, cultures, generations and political groups, with constant cross-pollination. There are no clear divides between these lines, and no one uniting factor.
A report by the University of South Australia in 2015 indicated there were 31 different nationalities that make up the community, with over a third were born in Australia. Similar research recently undertaken by the Scanlon Foundation has indicated that Muslims are just as diverse in piety and cultural expression. Less than 20% of Australian Muslims were born in the Middle East or Arab countries. Most Australians Muslims are Sunni but there is a significant minority of Shia and smaller numbers of Bektashis, Ahmadis, Alawis and Druze.
It thus becomes inherently reductionist to request comment from one person on such a broad matter. It assumes a reduction of all these differing elements, squishing this broad community into one homogenous blob.
This reductionism also largely characterises the narrative that currently surrounds Muslims. It is one that continues to reduce Muslims to caricatures, a narrative rooted in ways in which privilege shapes our society and our communities.
It leaves a 1400-year-old intellectual tradition as nothing more than motivation for murder, reinforcing the already dangerous assumption that Muslims are to account for the violence enacted in the name of Islam and that Muslims have something to answer for.
It would ignore the many complex root causes of such violence, ignoring the socio-economic, political and cultural factors at play, reducing it to a problem with Islam as a religion and not a societal one.
This, in turn, divorces the government and the wider Australian society of any responsibility in actually addressing any of those root causes. It enables demands to be made of the Muslim community without any effort put into addressing the deeper issues. 
And it is here we find the biggest reason Muslims will not speak out in certain discussions of Islam and Muslims. Considering the utterly embarrassing lack of nuance and fact around the discussions of Islam, this position can be very frustrating. Why should Muslim leaders be complicit in reducing a far larger problem to one defined by one or two outlying senators? 
It would merely enable the continued demonisation of Muslims, allowing the conversation to be had on Hanson’s parameters. Muslims, as a community, are left to respond to her every scrap, whether it be on a toilet bowl or on welfare payments.
This perpetual enforcement of a defensive position, this stripping of Muslim agency in a discussion of Muslims, leaves any Muslim representative a pawn in a rightwing race to the bottom of the xenophobia barrel.
Navigating these spaces has proven nearly impossible. Journalists want a story that will gain traction, traction is often wholly reliant on the narrative, and so will ask relatively leading questions to get their quotes and their story.




Agenda 21 is conspiracy theory. But don't dismiss Malcolm Roberts as a harmless kook | Jason Wilson




Often this is not a reflection on individual journalists or presenters. Ultimately, they are all just in service of this narrative, and it dwarfs everyone involved, leaving the Muslim community with a catch-22.
Either concede, and speak solely in response, thus reinforcing both the dehumanisation and the narrative above it, or stand defiant and have no one listen. In her speech, Hanson referred to an apparent “silence” from the Mufti, saying, “The Grand Mufti and other Muslim leaders are deafening with their silence, or lack of sympathy.”
Yet, we need only take a quick glimpse at the Mufti’s Facebook page for his long list of responses to violence, whether it be in France, Istanbul or Parramatta. The lack of coverage of these responses, when the opposite causes mass outrage, is difficult to understand but unsurprising. It comes down to that very same reductionist narrative that fuels which stories are picked up and which are ignored.
The problem with standing defiant, though, is that maintaining silence often leaves ravenous voices to take over the conversation and shred what little humanity Muslims can still demand. .
True change in this area requires the media and the government to genuinely listen to the Muslim community. Understanding the Muslim experience is key to a better relationship between government, media and Muslims. Both in silence and speech, there are important expressions of that experience. This is a first step towards having the complexities of minority communities represented accurately to the mainstream.

