
Evan McMullin is apparently running for president of the United States of America. But before Monday morning, about 135 people had heard of him, or at least followed him on Twitter. That’s probably enough people to get him elected president of his homeowner’s association.
His following blossomed overnight to nearly 33,000 – not quite enough to get him elected to the school board in Provo, Utah. 




The GOP tried to sink Obama. Instead, the party imploded | Richard Wolffe




That’s where he’s from, according to his Wikipedia page, which magically appeared along with his announcement. His extensive resume says that he was a Mormon missionary in Brazil, then a secret spy with the CIA, then had a stint with Goldman Sachs. He graduated from the Wharton School of business – evidently a pre-requisite for Republicans running for president – and last but not least, he’s worked for about a year as chief policy director of the House Republican Conference. So… a Capitol Hill staffer, too. 
Really? This is the guy to save the GOP from the evil grip of Donald Trump’s tiny hands?
Since it became crystal clear that Donald Trump would become the Republican nominee, GOP insiders have been shaking the bushes trying to come up with some sort of alternative. There is fracturing within the party the likes I’ve never seen in the 30 years I have worked in Republican politics.
The wealthy country clubbers and traditional donor class divided themselves between Jeb Bush and Marco Rubio. Social conservatives of the pro-life, pro-gun, pro-not-gay marriage variety eventually landed with Ted Cruz. Then there were the unexcitable moderate types who limped along quietly behind John Kasich to the bitter end, hoping for some sort of divine intervention in Cleveland that never happened. 
Last but not least, there was the remaining pissed off 30 to 40% of the GOP, the angry, white, middle-class Americans who wanted a narcissistic, sociopathic, Mexican-hating, baby-expelling, parents-of-a-dead-war-hero-offending, (I’ll stop there even though there’s so much more) reality TV star. 
Then after Trump won the Indiana primary, when every other candidate dropped out, GOP “leaders” decided that rather than stand on principle and forever lose the Trumpsters, who make up about a third of the party, they would throw their half-hearted, afraid-to-say-his-name-in-public support to “the nominee.” 
They justify their support by saing things like, “We have to protect the supreme court from Hillary Clinton” and citing a list of potential nominees that some junior Trump staffer lifted off the Heritage Foundation’s website. They trust a guy who has proven his aversion to the truth, ranging from lying about receiving a letter from the NFL opposing the proposed debate schedule to the intimate, man-crushing love-fest he shared with Vladimir Putin in the green room when they both appeared on 60 minutes “together.”




A Trump trainwreck is the only thing that will save the Republican Party | Katrina Jorgensen




Now, back to what’s-his-name. Evan McMullin. How did we get here? 
I picture a group of wealthy Republican donors, pollsters and consultants sitting around a big conference table saying, “OK, how about Romney? Anyone talk to Romney? What? He’s a no? OK, how about Kasich? He hates Trump. Let’s get Kasich. Scratch that. Kasich’s a no, too. Mark Cuban? He’s a billionaire. He can self-fund. He said no? Cross him off the list. What about that Bush kid? You know, the Hispanic one. Is he old enough? Somebody Google him. Oh, he endorsed Trump today. That won’t work. Let’s see. I know! How about Evan McMullin? He’s great! He’s Mormon and was a spy and works as a staffer on Capitol Hill. Somebody call him and tell him to quit his job. Bob, secure the domain name and put up a website. Steve, get some buttons made and maybe some signs – red, white and blue. Larry, write a press release. We’ll announce tomorrow.”
Since McMullin’s campaign began way back Monday morning, I’m not seeing the Romneys, Kasichs, Bushes or Koch Brothers of the world jumping on board. Likely they never will. The only effect I see his campaign having on the three-ring circus of an election we’re experiencing is perhaps draining a small percentage of anti-Trump Republicans from Libertarian Gary Johnson, eventually putting him under the 15% threshold to make it into the debates.
Which would actually help Trump. So much for a savior.

