
The upcoming men’s 1500m freestyle final will see the culmination of a week-long feud between Australian 400m freestyle champion Mack Horton and Chinese swimming star Sun Yang.
 While the destination of the gold medal will grant the victor a degree of personal satisfaction, the international fallout in the wake of Horton vocally labelling Sun a drug cheat suggests the repercussions may be far-reaching and potentially defining.
 The response to the Australian’s comments and actions signals a much-needed culture shift in the arena of competitive sport where a new motivation is emerging among clean athletes. 
 Doping in sport has always been essentially about motivation and opportunity, driving athletes in the pursuit of fame and fortune. The tables are turning as previously silent clean athletes find their voices and say “enough is enough”.




Mack Horton speaks out after golden swim as unrest poisons Rio pool




 It has been refreshing this week to see athletes with a newfound confidence willing to speak up about inequity in sport. No longer is a culture of acceptance the prevailing one; there is now a desire to embrace a culture of disclosure and remove the seedy shroud that facilitates behaviours that have moved us away from our key priorities in elite sport.
 The emphasis now needs to be on allowing athletes to have a stronger voice.
 One might ask what motivates athletes today. Why do they want to be on the podium? There are clear differences between those who are motivated extrinsically as opposed to those who are motivated intrinsically.
 But when we think about motivation we must think about the underlying core values that are still inherent to participation in sport. It is about expression, it is about responsibility for one’s self. It is about sportsmanship. It is about demonstrating their ability to succeed in the face of adversity, to overcome injury and the setbacks brought on by physical and mental challenges.
 Athletes make for excellent role models, offering an image of what we all aspire to in terms of our links to healthy outcomes. It’s why we get out of bed early in the morning, or replan our schedules to watch the action in Rio. These values inform national identity and national pride. 
 We want to be entertained by athletes but we want to know that the entertainment does not come with a cost to either the athlete or the integrity of the sport.
 I believe the World Anti-Doping Agency and the IOC and the international sport federations and governments have a lot more work to do in the space around motivation and opportunity. Drugs in sport will continue to be around for some time, particularly until athletes have greater ownership over what they accept as fair and what they won’t accept.
Rio 2016 presents us with an individual who has voiced an opinion, prompting others to think “Yes, I agree with that”. A new momentum has been generated. Now athletes are not afraid, they feel safe and supported and in a position to share their opinions and thoughts on a matter that has blighted sport globally because it’s important to them.
 Admittedly, seeing this happen at the Games is not pretty and leaves an off taste in the mouth. Within the spirit of the Games it feels uncomfortable. 




Swimmer Mack Horton's social media accounts flooded by angry Chinese fans




 But it is a complex situation, highlighted by the international reaction to Horton’s stance, because these values incorporate sportsmanship, individual responsibility, respect and the expression of opinions. How can Horton demonstrate sportsmanship while expressing his opinion about drug cheats?
 But the leadership of athletes like Horton, in the face of indecision on doping by bodies like the IOC, Wada, and Fina, can help to generate and propel a culture shift. His position has strengthened and gained in credibility with the support of Swimming Australia and the Australian Olympic Committee, along with conversations on social media that are supportive of his actions.
 He has set something in motion. While the next few weeks will be interesting on a personal level for him as he unpacks it all, the wider world of sport should look more hopefully to the months and years ahead. Rio may be remembered as the place where a line in the sand was drawn and a sporting culture with no place for drug cheats began to re-establish itself.

