
I have never made shy of the fact that I joined the Greens because of Bob Brown. He was a conviction politician, a man who truly believed in what he said, a man leading a party whose policies on the environment and social justice aligned so closely with my own values. Of course, my professional background in environmental management and sustainability already predisposed me to the Greens.
I can still remember my excitement the first time I met Bob in 2005 in his home town of Hobart. On a weekend away with my husband and a couple of friends this chance meeting happened in the Laundry cafe where we all ended up at the same time. So big was his star power that I felt really nervous approaching him, almost like a little girl who had seen her hero. I dragged my friend along, went and said hello and used my then 15-year old son as a proxy to get his autograph on a paper napkin.
But by making calls for a “clean-out” of the New South Wales division and asking a much-loved democratically elected NSW senator to step aside, Bob Brown has broken my heart.




Greens acrimony: Bob Brown unloads on Lee Rhiannon and NSW party




As my involvement with the Greens NSW has increased, from supporter to member to now state MP, the party has grown both in grassroots membership and parliamentary representation. In NSW we now have eight Greens MPs in state parliament – the highest of any state or territory in Australia.
One of the main things that retains my faith in the Greens is the empowerment of the members where for starters almost every office bearer position in NSW is elected by autonomous local groups across the state.
The first state council meeting I attended soon after joining the party demonstrated the genuine democratic decision-making that has become the trademark of Greens NSW – both revered and criticised by those inside and outside the party. Having a sceptical view of how politics generally operated with centralised power structures, I was both surprised and delighted by the devolution of power, the openness of discussions and the commitment of members to achieve a consensus-based outcome. 
Since taking up my role in NSW parliament, one of the questions I’m asked often is how I survive in a work environment that is conservative and adversarial. I’ll admit it’s not easy. For someone who ticks many minority boxes in parliament – woman, migrant, brown and a Muslim – it is an isolating place for me more than most. You have to watch your back all the time. It’s not a conducive environment for working together because of political polarities, big egos and a highly charged competitive atmosphere. 
So why do I do it? Perhaps, naively, I want to change the way politics is done rather than join the club. But what really keeps me going is the determination and commitment of Greens members across the state who put so much time and effort into making our movement strong for no other reason than their belief in what we all stand for.
And the one person who has inspired me consistently throughout my journey in the Greens by her passion, compassion and humanness is Lee Rhiannon. She is one of the most hardworking and inclusive people I know, and one with integrity and tenacity. She was preselected in the largest grassroots process in the country by the members of the NSW Greens, young, old and in between, to run at the top of the Senate ticket in the 2016 federal election. She has now been democratically elected by the people of NSW to represent them in the role of Senator and this is where she should stay. No one within the Greens or outside has the authority to ask her to step aside. This would be the the antithesis of a grassroots democratic party.




Richard Di Natale tells Greens not to air their election result grievances




With the growth of the party has come the added diversity of views on matters of policy and strategy, and an intensification of debate. From my perspective, these are welcome changes because they create opportunities for deliberation, for asking questions about where we want to be in future. What are our priorities? What do we want to look like? How should we get there? Should we aim to be the party of government? Do we focus on activism outside of parliament? Can both these outcomes be achieved simultaneously? Are we doing enough to increase active participation of women and of culturally diverse communities at all levels?
 These questions and more deserve to be discussed and answered. No party should be resistant to reflection and change. No doubt, post-election, all Greens branches across the country are engaged in discussions about the good, the bad and the ugly of the campaign. For example, here in NSW we need consideration of why our House of Representatives vote went up, but the important Senate vote went down. 
Change and evolution is part and parcel of any organisation that wants to achieve its vision but any change must be advocated from within the grassroots. There will always be power struggles in political parties but I want to be in one where the collective decisions of grassroots members outweigh those who have positional authority.

