
Rape victims say they feel ripped off, angry, and insulted by Universities Australia after a world expert has criticised the “poorly constructed”, “unscientific” online questionnaire that was released last month, as part of Universities Australia’s inquiry into sexual assault and harassment on university campuses across the nation.
The million dollar inquiry, which was launched with great fanfare in August, has been panned by rape survivors and experts alike who have described the online submission component of the inquiry as “baffling”, “poorly worded”, “clumsy” and “confusing”.
The Universities Australia inquiry is comprised of two parts: a survey which will be sent to a randomly selected group of current students and is yet to be released into the field, and a general submission questionnaire that anyone is eligible to complete.The submission questionnaire includes leading questions, overly complex triple-barrelled questions, inadequate or absent definitions, and questions which force the respondent to answer from a set of options that are presented as though they are mutually exclusive statements, when in fact they are not.




Sexual assault on campus is systemic. But Sydney uni has failed to act for decades | Anna Hush




“It’s not even clear who is eligible to participate” said one rape survivor who concluded (incorrectly) that she could not participate in the submission process having dropped out of her degree earlier this year following her rape in late 2015.
“It reads like you have to be a current student,” she said. The survivor, who wants to remain nameless, says the structure and wording made her wonder if the instrument had been made “deliberately unclear to try to deter some respondents and keep the figures artificially low”. 
Another former student who has also dropped out of her studies stated:




 

I went there to make a submission but then [concluded] I couldn’t [because I’m no longer enrolled]. I feel ripped off. It makes you feel like you don’t matter, like you’re not important enough to be heard.


Since being contacted for comment over these concerns, the Australian Human Rights Commission, which hosts the submission form, has now inserted an FAQ section and an additional sentence to the submission preamble which clarifies “you do not have to be a currently enrolled student to make a submission”. Screenshots of the original submission instrument confirm these are recent additions. Despite this clarification, several questions in the current version of the submission form remain phrased so as to suggest that it is a prerequisite that respondents are enrolled students. 
But even rape survivors who are currently enrolled students state that they have had difficulty navigating the form. One woman told me:




 

I found the survey [the online submission] incredibly confusing, and after reading through the questions decided not to make a submission, despite being prepared to do so beforehand.
I found the questions to be confusingly worded at times. I also found many of the questions to be confronting and would probably want to attempt this survey in more than one sitting, but there is no ‘save for later’ option. 
While I felt that my [rape] complaint was handled poorly by my college when I reported to them, I was worried that providing these details in the survey might get back to the college and somehow affect me in the future. I was also concerned about the level of private information that the survey requests, without a clear indication of who will or won’t have access to this information.
I am a currently enrolled student at the same university where I was assaulted, but since my assault five years ago my living and study arrangements are completely different. I find it odd that the survey calls for my current situation (postgraduate, off campus student in shared housing) rather than my situation at the time of my assault (undergraduate, on campus, in residential college accommodation).
[In the end] I chose not to make a submission because I was confused about who would have access to my information.


Another current student commented:




 

I wasn’t a student at the time of my assault, but the perpetrator was. It didn’t occur on campus, but when I started university, I had to be on the same campus as him and was in constant fear of running into him. When I went to the submissions form to report this incident, I felt uncertain that my experience was within the scope of the submissions process, and in the end I didn’t complete the form. I worry that experiences like mine will be missed by the survey and that it won’t capture the full extent of the problem. 


Now, one of the world’s leading experts on sexual assault survey design has slammed the online submission form as “unscientific” and “a missed opportunity”.
Professor Jennifer Freyd from the University of Oregon is an internationally recognised expert on sexual assault survey design and currently heads up a laboratory responsible for conducting campus-wide sexual victimisation surveys. She is also the editor of the Journal of Trauma & Dissociation.
“This [submission instrument] doesn’t seem to have been done by scientists at all. I don’t see any evidence it has been done by researchers who know how to do a survey,” she told me. 
“There is a whole rich literature there on how you invite participation so you don’t lose people. This does not appear to be based on a huge research body on how to assess these issues. I don’t see evidence of that.”
Freyd says that in addition to questions that will potentially “scare off” certain groups of survivors, the questionnaire fails to provide any definition of sexual assault – which is a major design flaw.
According to Freyd, instruments which research sexual assault need to provide clear behavioural descriptions of what is being researched, as many respondents do not know exactly what constitutes sexual assault, and many individuals who have experienced sexual assault are reluctant to categorise their experience in that way, due to the stigma it carries.
One study conducted by Freyd found that approximately only 30% of students who had experienced sexual assault would label it as such.
“Research has shown over and over that the majority of people who have experienced these things don’t use those labels for themselves ... I can tell you from all the other studies that there is a strong indication that if you really want to get at prevalence, you need to ask questions using behavioural language,” she said.
While the instrument does include a lengthy definition of sexual harassment, it does not include a clear definition of rape or sexual assault. This omission is significant because it can shape how respondents interpret the emphasis of the inquiry and the types of answers they give. 
“Different ways of asking questions will produce different results … I don’t think this [instrument] is designed to pick up many instances of sexual assault ... I can’t see any definition of penetration – it’s just bizarre, it’s like they were tip-toeing around the issue,” she said.
Her question suggests that we need to ask whether Universities Australia really understand the depth and extent of the problem. The Australian Human Rights Commission, which is carrying out the survey, is considered by many to be an esteemed institution in Australia but there is a lingering question around the willingness of universities to tackle this difficult subject.
Indeed, the last time the Australian Human Rights Commission attempted to conduct a survey into rates of rape at the Group of Eight universities, resistance from the universities and residential colleges was so considerable, that the project was killed off, amid concerns that the findings could pose a “reputational risk” to those institutions.
That survey, which was first recommended by former Sex Discrimination Commissioner Elizabeth Broderick back in 2011, was quietly shelved three years later.
In 2014, Damian Powell, a member of the Broderick review team and principal at the University of Melbourne’s Janet Clarke Hall, stated that he was highly disappointed that it hadn’t gone ahead, adding that a number of the “objections” that had been raised by others “were based on perception of reputational risk.” 
“The honest answer is it was put in the ‘too hard’ basket,” Dr Powell told Fairfax at the time. 
Universities Australia offered a defence of the institutions that had tanked the survey saying “our members are all very committed to student safety and ensuring a positive experience for all students.”




Study to determine sexual assault prevalence in Australian universities




As for this new survey, it appears that it is only going ahead because The Hunting Ground Australia Project raised seed funding which meant that a survey would progress with or without the co-operation of residential colleges. At that point Universities Australia got involved stamping their “Respect. Now. Always” branding on it, and presenting it as their own initiative.
Since that time, the scope of the survey has also changed and it will now no longer be sent out to all 1.3 million students as initially intended. Instead a significantly scaled down number of 60,000 students are expected to participate.
While this is still an appropriate sample size for data analysis, it negates the other important function of the survey as an engagement tool that would drive conversation, awareness and discussion of these issues on campuses. A mail-out to all 1.3 million students would have projected the issue onto everyone’s radar.
Given that at the hour long launch of the survey the word “rape” was only said one time, by one person, in passing (Tanya Plibersek – the only speaker not to be reading from carefully pre-scripted notes) rape survivors are right to ask: how can we trust the problem is being addressed if some people at the top still appear to have difficulty even saying the word?
Nina Funnell is a freelance writer and author. 
Editor’s note on 16 September 2016: After this article was published the Australian Human Rights Commission and Universities Australia requested clarification that the survey has two parts: a randomised “prevalence survey” sent to thousands of students, and an online portal where students or any interested person or group can make a submission. The article has been amended accordingly in the third paragraph and elsewhere to make that distinction clearer. Both organisations complained that they were not contacted for comment in advance. Edited versions of their responses are published below.
Universities Australia said in a statement: “To ensure that every student has an opportunity to share their experiences, even if they are not selected in the randomised sample, a separate online submissions portal was created by the independent Australian Human Rights Commission on their website. The commission has 30 years of experience in conducting inquiries and submissions processes. It led important work to prevent sexual assault and sexual harassment in the Australian defence forces. Close to 400 people have already come forward to the commission to tell their stories. 
“Our greatest concern is that misunderstandings caused by the article could deter students from completing the national prevalence survey. 
“The prevalence survey was carefully developed in close collaboration with a leading survey design expert, the ABS, Roy Morgan Research and the Australian Human Rights Commission. The National Tertiary Education Union and the National Union of Students have supported the survey project and the broader campaign.” 
The Australian Human Rights Commission said in a statement: “The submissions process is designed to collect qualitative information about individuals’ experiences … the submissions are not aiming to collect statistical data about the prevalence of sexual assault or sexual harassment. We have made it clear on our website and through the ‘Frequently Asked Questions’ that it is not a requirement to be a current student to make a submission. Therefore it is not accurate to say there have been efforts made to ‘keep the figures artificially low’ as reported. It is also worth noting that we have received numerous submissions from people who are not current students.
“This is not a scientific process; submissions are regularly used by government departments and other organisations to gather information and views from individuals about particular issues.” 

