
The departure of that tough non-quitter David Cameron has put into sharp focus a moment of exquisite agony for us all. Oxford University’s legendary Bullingdon Club is reportedly in danger of being wound down for good. The membership of this undergraduates’ drinking society – renowned for expensive tailcoats and trashing country pubs while adorably chanting “Buller, Buller, Buller” – is down from 30 to just two. With no new members, it could simply disappear.




Why we recreated the Bullingdon Club image – with a diverse twist | Simon Woolley




The Bullingdon was transformed by Evelyn Waugh into the crazily destructive Bollinger Club in his 1927 novel Decline And Fall; and Laura Wade’s stage play The Riot Club made it sound even more sinister. In the real world, the club was joined by Oxford students such as David Cameron, who later got very uptight indeed about media outlets reproducing the group photograph showing him and his pals striking deadly serious jeunesse dorée poses in the silly outfits.
Famous Buller alumni, like Cameron and George Osborne, are now on their way out. Yet the most famous Buller man, Boris Johnson, is now foreign secretary. Perhaps today’s Oxford students are embarrassed by club’s crass associations with entitlement, privilege and bad behaviour. The Bullingdon needs someone who can detoxify the brand, just as the Conservatives were (briefly) detoxified in 2005. Perhaps Cameron can be called in as honorary senior treasurer.
Yacht varnish wears off








  

‘Ex-BHS chief Philip Green who is always showing off his £100m yacht, the Lionheart.’ Photograph: http://livornodailyphoto.blogspot.co.uk


JK Rowling has this week been outed simultaneously as a yacht owner and an ex-yacht owner. Last year she bought Johnny Depp’s 156ft craft, the Amphritite, for £22m; but tiring of this extravagance, she has put it up for sale at a loss. The price tag is just £15m.
Rowling was probably soured on the ethos of yacht-ownership by the ex-BHS chief Philip Green, who is always showing off his £100m yacht, the Lionheart. (As a guest, David Walliams mischievously announced to Green that it was up there in the “top 10 yachts he’d ever been on”.)
I have only once been a guest on a yacht: a party on board the 414ft Octopus, owned by Microsoft’s co-founder Paul Allen. It was at the Cannes film festival, and I came on the arm of a London lawyer who was Allen’s actual friend. I was introduced to him after the legions of shipboard guests had been treated to a performance of Allen’s band (he played bass and Julian Lennon took vocals) He was poignantly courteous and shy, and interested in films. Something about the Gatsbyesque atmosphere was a bit overwhelming. I’m not surprised Rowling has decided it isn’t for her.
A frilly thriller




Washing-line snobbery: why can’t I hang my knickers out to dry?




It’s sometimes said that internet trolling has caused the world’s anonymous letter-writers, in all their spiteful pettiness, to become extinct. But that isn’t true. They’re still with us, still creepily incarnating a collective unconscious.
A resident of Devon, Rozamund Perrin, recently came home to find someone had taken a pair of her frilly knickers off the washing line and pushed them through the letterbox with the anonymous note: “It is totally inappropiate [sic] for this type of garment to be displayed opposite the village primary school.”
Perrin’s daughter displayed the note on Facebook, and the case has become a scandal. Could it be that the author of this anonymous letter is revealing rather more of his (or her – though I’m guessing his) sexual hangups than was consciously intended?
It reminds me of Agatha Christie’s The Moving Finger (1942), a Miss Marple mystery about an anonymous letter-writer in a country village who accuses two siblings of actually being lovers. We need a new Miss Marple to sort out the case of Devon’s frilly-knicker poison pen.

