
You read of the latest suspected chlorine attacks on Syrian civilians, which activists and rescue workers say came in the form of barrel bombs dropped on Aleppo by a helicopter pilot serving Bashar al-Assad. You see the pictures showing children clutching oxygen masks, grasping for breath. You see people hosing down the young and naked, desperate to wash away any trace of the burning, stinging chemical.




Syrian government 'drops chlorine gas' on rebel-held part of Aleppo




You read today’s Unicef report, showing that children now make up half of the world’s refugees and that half of the child refugees under UN protection come from Syria (along with Afghanistan).
You read all this and you wonder, how long will Syria’s agony last? Can anything be done, or will those children just have to wait until this conflict burns itself out, until all the multiple factions and proxy armies exhaust themselves, even if that takes another five years of bloodshed – or another five years after that?
As always, the smart money is on inaction. The realistic, worldly wise and grownup view says that nothing will be done. The rivalries on the ground and the competing interests of the region’s players and patrons are just too tangled and intense to be solved any time soon. If you’re the betting type, you’d wager that today’s meeting of Syrian opposition groups in London – the so-called High Negotiation Committee (HNC), comprised of more than 30 political and military forces – will achieve precisely nothing.




 

The HNC’s blueprint does put the lie to the notion that the only options are jihadist brutality or murderous Ba’athism




 

After all, the US and Russia negotiated for months seeking a way forward, and yet when Barack Obama and Vladimir Putin met at the G20 in Hangzhou on Monday – a meeting that, it was once hoped, might seal a Syria deal – they could only announce that, as Obama put it, “gaps of trust” remained between them.
You can see why diplomats are coming to view Syria as not just intractable, but insoluble. Just when you think you can see a clear set of threads that might be untangled, you find several more stubborn knots. To take just one example: Turkey seems like a useful ally in wresting territory from Islamic State – but it insists on also raining fire on the very Kurdish groups, backed by the US, who have been most effective in confronting Isis. So Kurdish fighters help free a Syrian city like Manbij from rule by the so-called Islamic State – prompting last month’s stirring scenes of civilians celebrating their liberation from tyranny – only for those same fighters then to face attack from Turkey.
So it is maddeningly complex. And yet there are surely grounds to oppose the fatalism and defeatism that governs most thinking about Syria.
First, it long used to be said that Syria was impossible because it represented a choice between two evils: Assad or Isis. But the coalition of opposition groups assembled today in London, just like the forces who freed Manbij, demonstrate that there is another way. The HNC’s blueprint for a pluralist, democratic Syrian future may look like a fantasy now, but it does put the lie to the notion that the country’s only options are jihadist brutality or murderous Ba’athism.




Nearly half of all refugees are children, says Unicef




Second, something else happened at this week’s G20. Lost among the reports of diplomatic (and undiplomatic) spats, the icy stares and the “son of a whore” insults, was the fact that the US and China formalised their joint commitment to reduce carbon emissions and combat climate change. Now if those two superpowers can overcome all their multiple tensions and frictions to collaborate on that, it surely cannot be beyond the US and Russia to construct some kind of plan for Syria – centred on Moscow using its influence over Assad.
Of course it will be difficult. But so was the agreement on global warming. We cannot let our diplomats and politicians give up on Syria. If we do, we are condemning those children – and their parents – who have faced five years of unimaginable bloodshed to keep on suffering. For another year and another year and, who knows, another year after that.

