Hounded soldiers

SIR – Is it any wonder that recruitment for the Armed Forces is at an all-time low? The current situation, in which soldiers are being hounded by lawyers seeking compensation for alleged abuses during the Iraq conflict, is an insult to our gallant defenders.

It is high time our rulers stamped out this practice and gave due honour to those who are prepared to lay down their lives for our safety.

Sid Davies

Bramhall, Cheshire

Surviving cancer

SIR – While it is good news that more people are living longer with cancer, the new figures from the Office for National Statistics also show that, in England, just 5.6 per cent of people with pancreatic cancer will live for five years or more after diagnosis.

These shocking survival rates have barely changed in the past 40 years. Yet UK cancer research investment in the disease lags at 1.6 per cent, and there are very few treatments.

That is why we are calling for increased research investment and urgent reform of the way cancer drugs are approved by the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence, so new treatments are more likely to be given the go-ahead.

It is also vital that people with pancreatic cancer are made aware of clinical trials in their area. We know that, currently, less than 5 per cent of people diagnosed each year are taking part in a trial, compared to an average of 18 per cent of cancer patients overall. People with the disease simply must be given the chance of spending longer with their loved ones.

Anna Jewell

Director of Operations, Pancreatic Cancer UK

London SE1

A better visa deal for Indian visitors to Britain

SIR – Britain and India share strategic, economic, cultural and human ties, both historic and contemporary.

Movement between the two nations is vital to this relationship. The Indian diaspora is the largest in Britain, at 1.4 million. More than 400,000 Indians visited Britain last year, spending £433 million, with business visitors adding £201 million to this. But France has overtaken Britain as Indian tourists’ European destination of choice, with over 500,000 visits in 2015.

In the past decade, Britain’s market share of India’s outbound tourists has halved, despite the market growing at 10 per cent each year. Had Britain kept its share, it would be welcoming over 800,000 Indian visitors annually – adding almost £500 million to the economy and creating 8,000 new jobs.

Visas are key to addressing this. A country’s visa regime is a statement about its global vision, and can serve as an “open for business” sign. Visa reform would support business, make Britain more attractive to Indian leisure tourists and help reunite the diaspora with visiting family. That is why we support a report by the Royal Commonwealth Society that calls for Britain to extend its £87 two-year visitor visa to Indian nationals – the same deal offered to China. As it stands, Indians must pay either £87 for six months or £330 for two years.

Next year is the UK-India Year of Culture, marking the 70th anniversary of Indian independence. A new visa deal will ensure that celebrations start off on the right foot, and make Britain a more welcoming destination for Indian visitors.

Craig Kreeger

CEO, Virgin Atlantic

John Holland-Kaye

CEO, Heathrow Airport

Shankar Narayanan

Vice President and UK Head, Tata Consultancy Services

Chandrajit Banerjee

Director General, Confederation of Indian Industry

Tim Alderslade

Chief Executive, British Air Transport Association

Darren Caplan

CEO, Airports Operators Association

Charlie Cornish

CEO, Manchester Airport Group

Paul Kehoe

CEO, Birmingham Airport

Tara Naidu

Regional Manager, UK and Europe, Air India

Ben Cowell

Director General, Historic Houses Association

Bernard Donoghue

Director, Association of Leading Visitor Attractions

Michael Hirst

Chairman, Business Visits and Events Partnership

Ufi Ibrahim

CEO, British Hospitality Association

Thomas Jenkins

CEO, European Tourism Association

Umesh Majithia

Commercial Director, Golden Tours

Sir David Michels

President, Tourism Alliance

Brigid Simmonds

Chief Executive, British Beer and Pub Association

Digvijay Singh

General Manager, Taj Hotel, 51 Buckingham Gate

Guldeep Singh Sahni

President, Outbound Tour Operators Association of India

Baroness Jo Valentine

Chief Executive, London First

Sir Gary Verity

Chief Executive, Welcome to Yorkshire

Deirdre Wells

CEO, UKinbound

Lord Bilimoria

Chairman, Cobra Beer

Taha Coburn-Kutay

Chairman, UK Asian Business Council

Lord Flight

Flight and Partners

Dr Ajay Rajan Gupta

CEO, Indo-UK Institute of Health

Mahendrasinh C Jadeja

Secretary-General, National Congress of Gujarati Organisation UK

Jaffer Kapasi

MD, J A Kapasi and Co Ltd

Professor Sri Ram Khanna

Delhi School of Economics, University of Delhi

Manoj Ladwa

CEO, India Inc

Dr David Landsman

Executive Director, Europe, Tata Group

Dr Ramesh Mehta

President, British Association of Physicians of Indian Origin

Dr Surender Munjal

Director, Centre for International Business, University of Leeds

Alpesh Patel

CEO, Praefinium Partners

Amarjit Singh

CEO, India Business Group

Ashok Verma

Chairman, Non-Resident Indian Foundation

Simon Walker

Director-General, Institute of Directors

Dr Linda Yueh

Fellow, St Edmund Hall, Oxford, Adjunct Professor, London Business School, and RCS Trustee

Arif Zaman

Executive Director, Commonwealth Businesswomen’s Network

Lord Balfe (Con)

Vice-Chairman, Indo-British All-Party Parliamentary Group (APPG)

Sir Henry Bellingham MP (Con)

Chairman, Commonwealth APPG

Bob Blackman MP (Con)

Vice-Chairman, Indo-British APPG

Baroness Flather (Crossbench)

Vice-Chairman, Indo-British APPG

Lord Howell (Con)

President, Royal Commonwealth Society

Nigel Huddleston MP (Con)

Co-Chairman, Visitor Economy APPG

Danny Kinahan MP (UUP)

Vice-Chairman, Visitor Economy APPG

Lord Lee of Trafford (Lib Dem)

Co-Chairman, Tourism APPG

Lord Marland (Con)

Chairman, Commonwealth Enterprise and Investment Council

Lord Popat

Former Chairman, Conservative Friends of India

Steve Pound MP (Lab)

Vice-Chairman, Indo-British APPG

Lord Rana (Crossbench)

Commonwealth APPG member

Margaret Ritchie MP (SDLP)

Co-Chairman, Visitor Economy APPG

Virendra Sharma MP (Lab)

Chairman, Indo-British APPG

Lord Sheikh (Con)

Secretary, Indo-British APPG

Dr Philippa Whitford MP (SNP)

Vice-Chairman, Visitor Economy APPG

Sammy Wilson MP (DUP)

Vice-Chairman, Visitor Economy APPG

Police in burkas

SIR – In the open but conservative Muslim state where I have lived for more than three decades, we have many policewomen.

They wear headscarves, but do not find it necessary to wear burkas (Letters, September 13). I can therefore see no reason why Muslim policewomen in Britain should be allowed to wear this garment.

Harry Thomas

Seeb, Oman

The only way to banish Japanese knotweed