So it can happen. The impossible can become not only possible but a done deed. As investors in Sports Direct gather for Wednesday’s annual general meeting at that now-infamous Shirebrook base, it’s worth recalling how far discussion of this company and of major business has progressed. Almost exactly a year ago, the Telegraph published an interview with one of the retailer’s biggest shareholders which attacked its critics as having a “fundamental illiteracy of capitalism”. The investor went on: “Unions and capitalism are not a natural fit but it is important to remember that Sports Direct has not broken any laws.”

By that time, both Labour and the trade union Unite had been protesting at what it claimed were 20,000 staff on zero-hours contacts, and a few fund managers had got a bit antsy at the way the company was run. But one year later, it is almost impossible to imagine such sentiments being published. One big reason for that is contained in the chronology at the back of Tuesday’s report into Sports Direct’s working practices. The first 30 years of the company are dispensed with in just five lines. Then comes the line for September 2015: “Series of articles about SD’s working practices are published in the Guardian.” December 2015: “Further articles about SD’s working practices are published in the Guardian.” The timeline makes more mention of this newspaper than it does of Mike Ashley, the company’s de facto boss.

Those 2015 articles gave the lie to that fund manager’s comments. Along with the investigations that followed, they showed that laws had indeed been broken at Sports Direct – as it now admits. Staff had been paid less than minimum wage. Female workers had been invited to perform sexual favours in return for contracts. The articles showed that meaningful labour representation – through trade unions and other institutions – can fit very well with capitalism, by preventing such abuses. And they showed that concerns about working practices and corporate governance are not the product of some failure to understand capitalism – far from it. At the time that Telegraph article was published, shares in Sports Direct were changing hands at £8 a go. Nestled in the FTSE 100, it was the discount retailer to watch. Now shares trade for around £3.50 and the firm has slid into the FTSE 250 midcap index. That is the price of being accused of running a “Victorian workhouse”, of being hauled over the coals by MPs, of being made the blushing-red centre of a giant scandal.

Mike Ashley isn’t the only one who has been publicly shamed in the past 12 months. Add to that list Philip Green, Dominic Chappell, and their highly paid advisers. Chuck in Google, for its sweetheart tax deal with George Osborne, and Apple, which last week was ordered to pay £11bn in back taxes. What all these cases affirm is a truth that the anonymous fund manager and his cohort have spent decades denying. Businesses need a social licence to operate. That is not written in black and white, nor a neat 10-point plan. But it is nonetheless real: the product of a relationship between companies and the rest of us. They need customers, investors, regulators and politicians on side.

Sports Direct is today fighting a desperate rearguard action to retain its social licence. That is why it has published this report and why chairman Keith Hellawell is likely to be advised on Wednesday by shareholders to step down. But as with any executive, Mr Ashley doesn’t get unilaterally to define his social licence. The report makes important admissions and proposes guaranteeing hours to some staff. But it was drafted by a solicitors’ firm that Sports Direct has previously retained. Investors should support the motion calling for a full independent review – which looks at the excessive reliance on agency work. They should vote out Mr Hellawell, who is plainly out of his depth. And they should remember there’s more at stake for Sports Direct than a few highly paid, highly docile executives. A lot more.