Could Owen Smith actually be worse than Jeremy Corbyn? I feel foolish even asking the question. Labour MPs, who see both men close up and personal, have obviously made their minds up. Figures such as Angela Eagle put party first and tried to work with Corbyn, but eventually got fed up. The chorus started by Hilary Benn a few hours after he was sacked by Corbyn - "Jeremy is not a leader" - has become deafening. Repeated ad nauseum, that message may persuade some party members who are starting to have their doubts.

Even Corbyn's close ally Diane Abbott only rated his performance against Theresa May at Prime Minister's Questions as "fine". She blamed colleagues for not backing him with cheers and for “sulking” on the benches. Even so, it was another Corbyn flop.

On such a low hurdle, surely Owen Smith would be an improvement? Well, yes and no. From what little we've seen of him so far he doesn't seem that charismatic. I doubt Theresa May would have much trouble with him, for example, and his remarks about Viagra suggest an almost Leadsom-like naivety. What is much more worrying – "the problem with Owen", if I might call it so – is that he explicitly declares himself a Corbynite and says he supports Jeremy's principles and policies; he'd just be a better advocate for them. Well, Owen, that's not good enough. You can have the slickest salesperson in town but if the message is poison then the public won't swallow it. And unilateralism, ramping taxes, restoring union power and being pro-EU are all electoral poison, even in some of Labour's heartlands.

All that even assumes that most of the parliamentary party would unite harmoniously behind Smith. They wouldn't. Chuka Umunna, Dan Jarvis, Keir Starmer, Hilary Benn and others would find themselves being continually talked up as better leaders. The party would remain split on defence and the economy. They would still not have a clue about tackling Ukip, let alone the Tories. Smith doesn't even have the base to face them down. The Corbynistas in defeat would be bitter and disruptive.

Owen Smith would press nuclear button

But could Smith actually be worse? Yes, certainly. The one thing that can be said for Corbyn, acknowledged even by his worst enemies, is that he is a sincere socialist who actually believes in democratic socialism and has hardly changed his mind on anything in about 50 years (except, ironically enough, Europe, where he is again in his most comfortable surroundings: in a minority). Corbyn is your ultimate conviction politician, a man for whom principles come before power. Labour likes things that way. Pragmatic election winners such as Tony Blair and Harold Wilson stand lower than vermin in the party's pantheon. Labour loves a loser.

Not just because he is Welsh and young-ish, Owen Smith reminds me of Neil Kinnock. And I suspect that, if he got the leadership, Smith would like to emulate Kinnock. In 1983 – when Corbyn got into parliament – Kinnock replaced another proper socialist, Michael Foot, and was even something of a protégé of Foot's. At the start of his term as Labour leader, and as part of his appeal, he was a unilateralist who was keen on nationalisation and higher taxes. Within a few years he was dragging his party towards the centre and closer to power: a long, bloody path. He did so with most of the party members and, crucially, the unions' support, and the unions were more sensible and powerful in the 1980s. Smith will lack that powerbase even if he wants to set out on the road to sanity, changing his mind, logic-chopping and eating his words along the way. He will look a cynical careerist, and he won't even succeed in dumping all the socialist baggage.

The most ridiculous claims made about Jeremy Corbyn







11 show all The most ridiculous claims made about Jeremy Corbyn



















1/11 He called Hezbollah and Hamas ‘friends’ True. In a speech made to the Stop the War Coalition in 2009, Mr Corbyn called representatives from both groups “friends” after inviting them to Parliament. He later told Channel 4 he wanted both groups, who have factions designated as international terror organisations, to be “part of the debate” for the Middle East peace process. “I use (the word ‘friends’) in a collective way, saying our friends are prepared to talk,” he added. “Does it mean I agree with Hamas and what it does? No. Does it mean I agree with Hezbollah and what they do? No.” Reuters

2/11 ‘Jeremy Corbyn thinks the death of Osama bin Laden was a tragedy’ Partly false. David Cameron used this as a line of attack at the Conservative Party conference but appears to have left out all context from Mr Corbyn’s original remarks. In an 2011 interview on Iranian television, the then-backbencher said the fact the al-Qaeda leader was not put on trial was the tragedy, continuing: “The World Trade Center was a tragedy, the attack on Afghanistan was a tragedy, the war in Iraq was a tragedy.”

3/11 He is ‘haunted’ by the legacy of his ‘evil’ great-great-grandfather False. A Daily Express exposé revealed that the Labour leader’s ancestor, James Sargent, was the “despotic” master of a Victorian workhouse. Addressing the report at the Labour conference, Mr Corbyn said he had never heard of him before, adding: “I want to take this opportunity to apologise for not doing the decent thing and going back in time and having a chat with him about his appalling behaviour.”

4/11 Jeremy Corbyn raised a motion about ‘pigeon bombs’ in Parliament This one is true. On 21 May 2004, Mr Corbyn raised an early day motion entitled “pigeon bombs”, proposing that the House register being “appalled but barely surprised” that MI5 reportedly proposed to load pigeons with explosives as a weapon. The motion continued: “The House… believes that humans represent the most obscene, perverted, cruel, uncivilised and lethal species ever to inhabit the planet and looks forward to the day when the inevitable asteroid slams into the earth and wipes them out thus giving nature the opportunity to start again.” It was not carried.

5/11 He rides a Communist bicycle False. A report in The Times referred to Mr Corbyn, known for his cycling, riding a “Chairman Mao-style bicycle” earlier this year. “Less thorough journalists might have referred to it as just a bicycle, but no, so we have to conclude that whenever we see somebody on a bicycle from now on, there goes another supporter of Chairman Mao,” he later joked.

6/11 'Jeremy Corbyn will appoint a special minister for Jews' False so far. The Sun report in December was allegedly based on a “rumour” passed to the paper by a Daily Express columnist who has written pieces critical of the Labour leader in the past. The minister did not materialise in his shadow cabinet.

7/11 ‘Jeremy Corbyn wishes Britain would abolish its Army’ False. Another gem from The Sun took comments made at a Hiroshima remembrance parade in August 2012 where Mr Corbyn supported Costa Rica’s move to abolish it armed forces. “Wouldn’t it be wonderful if every politician around the world…abolished the army and took pride in the fact that they don’t have an army,” he added. The caveat that “every politician” must take the step suggests Mr Corbyn does not support UK disarmament just yet.

8/11 Jeremy Corbyn stole sandwiches meant for veterans False. The Guido Fawkes blog claimed that the Labour leader took sandwiches meant for veterans at at Battle of Britain memorial service in September but a photo later emerged showing him being handed one by Costa volunteers, who later confirmed they were given to all guests.

9/11 He missed the induction into the Queen’s privy council True. After much speculation about Mr Corbyn’s republican views and willingness to bow to the monarch, his office confirmed that he did not attend the official induction to the privy council because of a prior engagement, but did not rule out joining the body.

10/11 Jeremy Corbyn refuses to sing the national anthem. Partly true. The Labour leader was filmed standing in silence as God Save the Queen was sung at a Battle of Britain remembrance service but will reportedly sing it in future. Mr Corbyn was elusive on the issue in an interview, saying he would show memorials “respect in the proper way”, but sources said he would sing the anthem at future occasions.

11/11 He is a member of the All-Party Parliamentary Group for Cheese True. The group lists its purpose as the following: “To increase awareness of issues surrounding the dairy industry and focus on economic issues affecting the dairy industry and producers.”

Kinnock could purge Militant because it was a tiny, nutty Trotskyite sect; Momentum is basically the biggest single organisation in today's Labour movement: idealisitc, motivated and digi-native. Smith and the Parliamentary Labour Party don't stand a chance.

The nightmare is just beginning.