The arguments about GM crops show the folly of trying to understand technology as if it stood outside political and economic power. There is nothing intrinsically wicked about manipulating genes directly, rather than through selective breeding. What is wrong and must be combatted is the use of this technology to exploit some of the poorest farmers in the world for the benefit of some of the richest corporations. The struggle between Monsanto and the Indian government shows this clearly.

GM cotton has transformed the Indian cotton industry since its introduction in the early years of this century. Grafting into the DNA of cotton plants some genes from a common bacterium which make them poisonous to the insects that normally consume them has made it possible to grow cotton more efficiently with less use of pesticides. This has made India the second largest cotton exporter in the world. There are two snags. Many people, not just in the west, are deeply concerned by the unintended consequences of GM, and the Indian cotton boom depends on a single company – Monsanto – which has a deservedly bad reputation and a monopoly over the technology in India.

The seed has to be brought afresh every year, and from time to time the genetic recipe has to be tweaked as parasites develop an immunity to the originally grafted poisons. The struggle between parasites and their hosts is a constant feature of evolution and widespread use of these particular bacterial poisons produces a correspondingly strong selection pressure for resistance in parasites.

These two factors assure Monsanto of a steady income stream. That is offensive both to Indian nationalists and some Green activists. Certainly, Monsanto’s position, extracting rents from farmers for the enrichment of foreign shareholders, fits into a long Indian history of such exploitation, not least by the British empire. But that same history shows that the ruthless exploitation of poor farmers does not result from technology. It is oppressive landlords, heavy taxes and rapacious money-lenders who grind them into the dust. And it is difficult to believe the claims for the superiority of native seeds when farmers themselves are willing to pay a premium for the GM version.

The Indian government has been trying to cut that premium and reduce the price of GM seed. Earlier this year it slashed the royalties payable by Indian intermediary companies to Monsanto; some had been withholding royalties, claiming they could not afford them. Now Monsanto has retaliated with an announcement that it will not be releasing in India the next generation of its cotton seeds, upgraded to overcome the resistance that has evolved in the past five years.

This looks like a hardball negotiating tactic. A fair price needs to emerge from these negotiations, even if multinational corporations have no concept of a fair price, only of profit. The Indian government is right to defend the interests of its farmers; in this instance the GM seed is actually useful to them and to the cotton industry. GM crops cannot provide a miraculous and permanent solution to the problem of agricultural pests, any more than antibiotics provide a miraculous and permanent solution to the problem of human infections. In both cases nature will fight back. That does not make their benefits less real.