
On Saturday, the Labour Movement for Europe published the result of its individual membership vote on the Labour leadership nomination. By a margin of 10 to one its members nominated Owen Smith. It was compelling evidence of the strong rank-and-file commitment to engagement in the European Union.
LME members, like people across the Labour movement, are pro-EU for the same reason they are democratic socialists – they know that, nationally and internationally, we are stronger when we work together for practical policies to improve the lives of workers everywhere. They also recognise that, in our world and our time, the great menaces and the great opportunities are beyond “single nation” answers. Sovereignty – meaningful power to uphold and advance the interests of humanity – must be collective in order to be effective.




London set to bear brunt of post-Brexit vote downturn, say experts




That solid, inescapable truth remains. It will not be reduced or mitigated or averted by the vote to leave the EU. In the months and years to come we will have to sustain the rational, progressive case for international cooperation, particularly in our continent, for every current and future reason of environmental, consumer and political security; scientific, technological and medical advance; investment, employment, decent working conditions and the regulation of markets.
Smith fully understands and supports that stance and the action that it demands. He campaigned vigorously for remain across the country, emphasising that full UK participation in the world’s largest single market is crucial for jobs, inward investment, wages and rights at work, at the same time as making the positive case for modernising reform.
Jeremy Corbyn has spent a political lifetime resisting or opposing such engagement. To give him his due, in recent months he has given muted support to the long-established pro-EU policy of the party. It was the least that could be expected by trade unionists, local government activists and rank-and-file members who have long valued – and contributed to improving – EU policies for fostering regional development and community initiatives. But he entered the referendum campaign late, took a holiday in June, and described his enthusiasm for staying in the EU as “seven out of 10”. Plainly, the party leader’s commitment had neither clarity nor conviction. Somehow, it lacked momentum.




 

No real effort was made by Corbyn to combat the deceitful, often xenophobic fictions of the Tory and Ukip Brexiteers




 

In contrast to that rather listless effort during the campaign, Corbyn’s response to the result showed urgency. At 7.30am on 24 June he was telling BBC TV: “Article 50 must be invoked now.” Not even the leave leaders had the vaguest idea of what “leave” actually meant – or means – in practice. It was a reaction that showed either ignorance, a complete lack of concern for the instability and uncertainty following exit, or a willingness to let the Tory Brexiteers run amok. Later that morning, his office sent out a briefing calling him “a reluctant remainer”. Small wonder the public had been confused by the leader’s ambivalence. Even smaller wonder that Labour people who had slogged for remain throughout the campaign felt deep irritation. No wonder at all that his own economic advisory council said it was “unhappy that the Labour leadership has not campaigned more strongly”.
In the weeks since, Smith has called for Labour to have a seat at the table in the negotiations, and for the British electorate to have a say on the final deal. Corbyn has either been silent on this central issue or so soft-voiced that no one has heard a word. It seems that he just wants to leave it all to the Tories, who haven’t even got a government majority on the issue. That’s not leadership.
Of course, we can’t be certain what would have happened if Corbyn had made a campaign effort worthy of a leader. But we do know the margin was slight; that a clear, progressive case put to young voters would have been likely to have positive effects; and that resonant support for the trade union movement’s remain campaign could have had productive results. But he didn’t do that. Ten events in six weeks was never going to be enough to mobilise potential support.




Treasury to guarantee post-Brexit funding for EU-backed projects




No real effort was made by him to combat the glib, deceitful, often xenophobic fictions of the Tory and Ukip Brexiteers. No argument was made for the practical and economic advantages of migration, or case made for restoring Labour’s aid to pressured areas. On the most vital issue of this generation – the future national and international wellbeing of our country – the leader simply didn’t show leadership.
But we’ve got to have a leader who is up to the task. We’ve got to have a standard bearer who will assert Labour’s proper, justified role in shaping and negotiating the UK’s future relations with the EU. That’s why the Labour Movement for Europe nominated Smith to be the next leader of the Labour party. He is a socialist to the core; a dedicated and knowledgeable European reformer; a gutsy campaigner and negotiator with radical and credible policies. He can put the Tories under pressure, bring Labour people together to work for victory, and win voters to our cause. We need all of that. And we need it now.

