
Dead Poets Society, that carpe diem bellow about a group of boys in a New England prep school and their teacher, Mr Keating (Robin Williams), is in production as an off-Broadway play opening next month.
It’s ostensibly a story about Neil (Robert Sean Leonard), a sensitive lad whose theatrical ambitions conflict with his authoritarian father’s preferences, and Keating, who Walt-Whitmans the boys into writing poetry and seizing the day.
However, the real star of the movie is Charlie “Nuwanda” Dalton, the smart-ass of the bunch with a great deal of personal style, pre-Bowie lightning bolt body art and sax abilities. Nuwanda is character with an enduring fandom and cultural relevance. “Damn it Neil, the name is Nuwanda” is a phrase will always hold up a little flag for nonconformists in the face of overwhelming institutional crushing. 
Nuwanda was played by Gale Hansen, who didn’t do much acting after that, while many of his classmates from Welton Academy (Leonard, Ethan Hawke, Josh Charles) have been working steadily since then. 
With a play in the works, these acting trajectories will undoubtedly become the focus of renewed interest, with the “where are they now” features and listicles. One of the purposes of these types of articles, it seems to me, is to shame those who “didn’t do anything” afterwards, except for, I don’t know, live their lives. There’s an accusation there: why aren’t you more famous? 
The phrase “one-hit wonder” certainly implies that it’s a wonder you ever had a hit because you never followed it up. Your lack of follow-up is automatically a bad thing. But why is a truly singular performance, or one number one hit, or one perfect book something to disdain? Isn’t greatness greatness? Why would it be better if, say, one had a slew of mediocre performances or songs or books?
Excellence – having created something that people still love and connect to decades later – should stand regardless of whether someone goes on to be prolific. I’ve read Limahl (he of the terribly-named group Kajagoogoo) say that he doesn’t mind singing Too Shy over and over again because it means a lot to people in the audience, as it reminds them of specific moments in their youth. If you doubt that Too Shy is excellent, please take a NSFW moment and listen to the first 30 seconds. 
I seem to love a strange amount of personal bests. Favorite Bond actor/movie? George Lazenby, On her Majesty’s Secret Service. Favorite Von Trapp? Leisl, played by Charmian Carr. My favorite movie performance? Jason Miller in the Exorcist.
A pitfall of onceness is that disappearance comes more easily. I love the one-season series Rubicon, but it’s unavailable despite having been broadcast in 2010. I happened upon a worn paperback book called the Auctioneer and read it voraciously, and wondered why the author, Joan Samson, hadn’t written any more books despite a cover line trumpeting SOON TO BE A MAJOR MOTION PICTURE. That major motion picture was never made, and Samson died of cancer.
There may be a bit of fear and jealousy involved with the disdain of wonders. Fear that even if one can reach some fairly lofty heights, there’s no guarantee it will happen again, despite all efforts. Fate is fickle. Why not decades of Gale Hansen films? Sometimes the gods are just assholes. And maybe, at the core, there’s a self-indulgent sadness because you, the fan, would like to have seen/heard more of that art. 
But sometimes more isn’t better. See: Go Set a Watchman.
I wish Hansen had appeared in more films and television shows; many Dead Poets Society fans feel that way. I don’t know how he feels about it. Maybe he didn’t want to act any more. It’s a selfish wish, really, to demand that someone who gave you something precious, who created a work of art that has stayed with you for decades, give you more. 
Maybe so-called “one-hit wonders” are so incandescent that, perfection having been achieved, the artist can drop the mic, so to speak. This list of the top one-hit wonders according to Spotify shows a list of songs that are still in heavy rotation on my radio regardless of its creators lacking subsequent hits. 
Ongoing mediocrity is transient. But I will always turn up my radio when Groove is in the Heart comes on.

