
I’ll never forget where I was when I heard we’d voted out: finishing off the leftover foie gras Sam Cam had generously left out for me in the Downing Street kitchen before she went to bed. I was positively purring with delight, and for once it had nothing to do with my breakfast. “Free at last!” I thought to myself.
It’s only now, when I survey the wreckage of the last few weeks, that I realise how wrong I was. What a mug. DC called it “buyer’s remorse”. I didn’t know what he was on about at first. But then I remembered how I felt when I woke up the morning after a bit of a session and realised with a sinking feeling what I’d got up to the night before on the way home.











Britain’s political pets at war


Palmerston, the Foreign Office cat, was strutting around Downing Street. We ended up trading blows, again, and I came off worse. I expect DC and Boris felt the same back in their Bullingdon Club days, the morning after they smashed up that restaurant. The difference is I got an Asbo and they ended up running the country.
DC didn’t seem to appreciate the comparison when I shared it with him to console his Brexit blues. But he was soon back to his cheerful self, humming a jaunty tune on the steps of No 10 after he announced he was jacking it all in.











David Cameron hums tune after statement on Theresa May


He had to go, of course. I’d warned him often enough he’d never understand the man on the street. I wanted to stick the St George’s flag up in the Downing Street window during Euro 2016, but Sam Cam said it was tacky. And that sums up the difference between us and them. You’ll never see that posh Notting Hill set flag-waving – unless it’s at the Last Night of the Proms. Far too vulgar.
But whatever you say about Tories, they do know how to shake things up. I was shocked by the brutality of it all, truth be told. First Michael Gove knifed Bojo, then Theresa May stuck her kitten heels into Andrea Leadsom. And when the dust settled, there she was, standing sternly over the removal men out back and giving them firm but polite instructions on where to put her furniture. Well she certainly sent Dave packing.



David Cameron 
(@David_Cameron)
Proof... pic.twitter.com/UZVXn6WcUw

July 13, 2016


What does it all mean for me? Well, I don’t mind telling you that I’m feeling a little bit under the weather. I miss Sam Cam and the kids of course, not least because Mrs C was always very happy to share the leftovers. I had some delicious caviar when the Russian ambassador last came round, although I’m not sure the plutonium agreed with me. The new PM seems very agreeable but there’s a rumour going round she’s allergic to cats. And worse still, not only is Palmerston is sticking around but there is another puss on the block, Gladstone.








  

‘I’ve never walked away from a fight, and I’m not going to start now.’ Larry’s warning to the Treasury’s newcomer Gladstone. Photograph: HM Treasury/PA


Their claws may be sharp but I’m a west London pugilist who has never walked away from a fight, and I’m not going to start now. Besides, we’re living in turbulent times, and fortunes can change overnight.
No, my real worry is what happens if May calls an early election and Jezza wins. I hear he has a feline called El Gato and I really don’t fancy sharing this gaff. I didn’t vote to leave the EU only to end up with a Spanish housemate.

