SIR – I find it surprising that, only a few months after Britain voted to “take back control”, the Government has handed over a large chunk of future energy production to a French state-owned company with Chinese backers.

The Hinkley decision comes at a time when changes in government policy have decimated the renewable energy sector. There are plenty of modern solutions to our energy needs which remain largely neglected, such as home and grid-scale batteries that store and release excess renewable power.

Our post-Brexit aims should include creating a more self-reliant economy. Hinkley does the opposite.

Baroness Jones of Moulsecoomb

Green Party

London SW1

Spiralling care bills

SIR – With growing demand for adult social care services, it is useful to consider future cost estimates as an illustration of the pressures that councils are under.

Analysis of the latest population growth data for Surrey predicts that an extra 2,600 people over the age of 65 will fall under the county council’s care by 2036, up from 5,400 today. This increase would add an estimated £59 million to the authority’s annual adult social care bill.

While the 2 per cent council tax precept – introduced nationally earlier this year to fund care – was a positive step, it falls tens of millions of pounds short of what we need now, without even considering the enormous extra demand that we are likely to face in 20 years’ time.

Cllr Mel Few

Kingston-upon-Thames, Surrey

Eyes on the road

SIR – The Government needs to listen to Judith Woods (Comment, September 16) on the dangers of driving while using a mobile phone.

A combination of education and enforcement helped to curb drink-driving. The Government should mirror this success and begin a public awareness campaign that spells out the perils of using a mobile phone at the wheel, while ensuring there is a real threat of being caught.

Traffic police numbers have dropped by 37 per cent over recent years. Let’s increase their numbers and make our roads safer for everyone.

Duncan Dollimore

Road Safety Campaigner, Cycling UK

Guildford, Surrey





SIR – How is the use of a hands-free phone, which some people now wish to ban, any more dangerous than holding a conversation with a passenger, travelling with a screaming child in the back – or even listening to the radio?

Sally Hancock

Goostrey, Cheshire

Ministers just aren’t equipped for a swift Brexit

SIR – Under different circumstances, Sir James Dyson and Roger Payne (Letters, September 16) might well have been right in urging the Government to invoke Article 50 immediately and start the process of leaving the European Union.

Unfortunately, David Cameron and his Remainers were so convinced they could not possibly lose the referendum that they failed to put even the most basic plan in place for the eventuality that Britain backed Brexit. Theresa May and her Government have had to start from scratch to shape both Britain’s future and the complexities of negotiations to extricate ourselves from the EU.

Patricia White

North Shields, Northumberland