
On MSNBC’s Morning Joe on Thursday, libertarian presidential contender Gary Johnson humiliated himself by showing total ignorance of the Syrian city of Aleppo, which has been the center of so much carnage during the ongoing Syrian civil war.
“What would you do if you were elected about Aleppo?” show panelist Mike Barnicle asked.
“And what is Aleppo?” Johnson responded.
It was hardly a good moment for Johnson, and it is an unacceptable knowledge gap for someone running for commander-in-chief. Before an American president can exercise judgment, there is a basic knowledge threshold that has to be met.




We just got a terrifying taste of the Clinton-Trump debates to come | Lucia Graves




But, in Johnson’s (weak) defense, he has never claimed to be the world’s greatest foreign policy guru, and no serious person actually believes he will ever be president. 
Which brings us to one Donald J Trump.
“I know more about Isis than the generals, believe me,” Donald Trump declared last year during the Republican primary.
What are the odds that Donald Trump knows what Aleppo is, much less knows more about Isis than American generals tasked with defeating the terror group? (Hint: not high.)
In presidential politics, very few questions should be considered “gotcha” questions. After all, when you are running for leader of the free world, you should be prepared to answer pretty much anything in the name of selling yourself to the American public. This should especially be true for candidates who make bold claims about their knowledge base. So why haven’t journalists forced Trump to prove he is the expert he claims to be?
Or why not see if he knows as much about Isis as a relatively informed middle school social studies teacher? Why not ask him, for instance, whether Isis is a Sunni terror group or a Shia one? And while you’re at it, ask him to explain the difference between Sunni Islam and Shia Islam? If he passes that basic knowledge test – and there’s about a 0% chance he will pass that test – move on to more specific questions.
When radio talkshow host Hugh Hewitt put Trump to a test like this back in September – Hewitt is perhaps the only one in the media to pose such questions to Trump thus far – The Donald failed miserably.
“I will when it’s appropriate,” Trump sputtered when Hewitt asked him whether it is important if he knows the difference between the terror groups Hamas and Hezbollah. “I will know more about it than you know, and believe me, it won’t take me long.”
None of this is to say a candidate who can write a detailed essay on the founding of Isis – or a critique of America’s handling of the Syrian civil war – is destined to become a great foreign policy president. Hillary Clinton could probably answer all the aforementioned questions, and her foreign policy track record is terrible. Trump is right to point out that judgment matters in this arena too, as he usually does when pressed on his lack of actual foreign policy experience. But before an American president can exercise judgment, there is a basic knowledge threshold that has to be met.
Trump clearly doesn’t meet that threshold. Even worse, there’s little evidence he is even trying to close his knowledge gap.

