A Channel 4 interview about racist abuse was interrupted after passers-by making racist comments towards her.

During the discussion with a Polish NHS worker, a group of onlookers can be heard calling her a “f***ing Polish grass” and a “grassy f***”.

Named only as Alexandra, the woman appeared visibly shaken and called the police.

Alexandra explained how racist abuse has become commonplace in her life. In the interview, Alexandra describes how she experienced “stones being thrown at our windows and I’ve been sworn at many times for being Polish.”

In another incident, a Polish man was chased into her front garden and beaten up. “He had blood all over his face, all over his clothes”, she recalls.

“His lips were dark, just because of all the blood drying.”

Brexit racism and the fightback







10 show all Brexit racism and the fightback

















1/10 Floral tributes and a photograph of Arek Jozwik are seen on a bench at the shopping centre where he was killed, in Harlow, Essex Getty

2/10 PA

3/10 These cards were found near a school in Huntingdon, Cambridgeshire, the day after the EU referendum Twitter/@howgilb

4/10 Getty

5/10 Romford, Essex, June 25 @diamondgeezer

6/10 A worker at this Romanian food shop was asleep upstairs at the time of this arson attack in Norwich on July 8, but escaped unharmed. Hundreds later participated in a ‘love bombing’ rally outside the shop to express their opposition to racism and their support of the shop owners. JustGiving/Helen Linehan

7/10 This neo-Nazi sticker was spotted in Glasgow on June 26 Courtesy of Eoin Palmer

8/10 But after news emerged of neo-Nazi stickers appearing in Glasgow, some in the city struck back with slogans of their own. Courtesy of Eoin Palmer

9/10 Getty

10/10 More signs began to appear in some parts of the UK, created by people who wanted to show their opposition to post-referendum racism Courtesy of Bernadette Russell

Alexandra said racist abuse is “getting worse since the Brexit. I just tend to get more people asking me for my nationality.”

The current number of hate crime reports is 14 per cent higher than at this time last year. In the week following the Brexit vote, the number of reported incidents of hate crime increased by 58 per cent.

A number of prominent Leave voters, however, have denied the vote to leave the European Union caused a spike in hate crime. Daniel Hannan, a Conservative MEP, has blamed the media for “jumping on” incidents of abuse that have nothing to do with Brexit.

He maintained it was an insult to the 17.4 million people who voted to Leave to suggest “there is some connection between voting to take back our laws and being unpleasant”.

Alexandra, however, maintained: “I am not wanted here”.

“I just feel like I just want to go back… It breaks my heart."