
I’m not quite sure how to put this, so I’m just going to come out and say it: I think I would vote for George Osborne.
Very quickly, a qualifier. I would not vote for any version of Osborne who existed before the middle of last week. The Osborne who suffocated us all under the greying blanket of austerity. The Osborne who half-heartedly attempted to waft away Brexit. The Osborne whose greatest public performance was getting booed at the Paralympics. The Osborne whose automatic response to any form of spontaneity involved nervously flicking his tongue in and out while blinking, like a looping gif of an android being dunked in a bathtub. I have looked inside my heart, and I will never be able to align myself with this man.
However, the Osborne photographed listlessly firing a machine gun into the depths of the Vietnamese jungle, near a memorial to the Viet Cong, because what the hell, what are we going to do, sack him? There’s a man I can get behind. This guy very clearly doesn’t care any more. This guy looks like he gets morning drunk in Wetherspoons. He looks like he regrets at least one of his tattoos. He looks for all the world like someone who only went to Vietnam because he heard that for the right money they will let you ride a sad old circus elephant through a minefield for a laugh. This Osborne has edged towards the precipice, and he has realised that nothing matters. He’s dangerous. He’s a rebel. He’s even started to tweet flippantly. He would absolutely get my vote
Similarly, I’m also ready to admit that I might have got Michael Gove wrong. All these years, I had written him off as uptight and out-of-touch, a lacquered ventriloquist’s dummy unable to escape his offensively pragmatic Westminster bubble. But then last week I saw the photo of him looking sweaty and dishevelled during a miserable jog – face peppered with an Ian-Beale-wilderness beard, eyes far away and full of dulled self-loathing – and everything changed. I didn’t see Gove in that photograph. I saw a man who had given up. I saw a man with nothing to live for. I saw defeat. Put simply, I saw myself. Give Michael Gove 2.0 a crack at the Tory leadership, all his rehearsed charm replaced with sloped shoulders and a guttural sigh of resignation, and I would vote for him in a fingerclick.
I don’t care what people say. I don’t care about the studies claiming that success is attractive. I don’t care about the proven benefits of confidence and certainty. I don’t want my politicians to be smart and bulletproof and statesmanlike. I want them to have known defeat. I want them to be human. And it looks like the only to make them human is to utterly obliterate their sense of self-worth first.
You agree with me, I know you do. Quick, here’s a test. Which Ed Miliband would you vote for: the Miliband who so desperately wanted to be prime minister that he carved his policies on to a giant gravestone, or the Miliband from a month after the election, when he was so utterly bereft that he had stopped shaving and started to resemble the lecturer from uni who everyone had a crush on? Of course the latter. Of course.
This doesn’t always work, I will admit. During his time in charge of the country, David Cameron always appeared to secretly resent all the peripheral trappings that leadership required – all the state schools and staycations – and so seeing him tub around Corsica in his £225 swimming trunks this month, giddy with school’s-out freedom, had exactly the opposite effect. His resignation didn’t shatter him into a trillion pieces, and so now we can never trust him again.




Was George Osborne's machine gun fun in Vietnam in poor taste?




Same goes for Tony Blair. Ever since leaving office in 2007, he has bounced from one ethically iffy job to another, getting exponentially richer with every coat of Ronseal he has appeared to have applied to his body. And everyone hates him for it. Imagine how different it would be if he had grown a tatty beard, stopped brushing his teeth and got pictured playing his stupid guitar for spare change outside an abandoned Woolworth’s. Why, he’d be back in Downing Street in the blink of an eye.
This is how I want my politicians. I want them to be like the rest of us, broken and crumpled. I want their first words every morning to be swearwords because they can’t face looking the world in the eye, and their last words every evening to be “ugh” because they can’t bear the prospect of having to do it all over again.
We can do it. We can do it by taking everything away from them the moment they get it, and seeing if they can crawl their way back to the summit. George Osborne is nearly there. He’s one harrowing Latvian stag weekend away from rock bottom, and only then will he start to look like one of us. He can do it. I believe in him.
Incidentally, Farage’s moustache doesn’t count. I want my politicians broken, not done up like a cackhanded ’Allo ’Allo! am-dram.

