
What have we here: a sweating, dishevelled Michael Gove sporting a hipster beard? Summer is full of surprises. This is not necessarily a good one. Men with new facial hair look like Odysseus back from exotic lands, or chillaxed founders of profitable start-ups. Others simply look like they need to shave, just as politicians wearing an open-necked shirt too often look as if they’ve forgotten their tie.
Beards have acquired plenty of new significances. One is the Corbynista “too busy fretting about Trident to shave” look, with its cultural roots in 1968. Another is the summer look of stressed professionals who for three weeks rebel by ditching the Gillette, until colleagues make one joke too many about Glastonbury being over, mate.




Stylewatch: Michael Gove's beard




To this we might add the “beard of despair” of those seeking a new audience or a fresh start. The Gove beard is the result of trauma coupled with the hankering for new worlds to conquer – triumphing in a referendum you had not planned on winning, launching a unexpected leadership bid and then falling out with the rest of the party, being enough to be going on with.
But beardy social democrats heaping disdain on Gove’s russet designer stubble should hold back. Collective mockery and disdain aimed at politicians is always the first sign of their misfortunes bottoming out. Indeed, being roundly disliked and mocked for appearance is often a sign of the eventual revival of good fortune and acceptance. It’s the poor saps in the middle that have it really tough – they’re the ones we can’t remember.
Ed Balls has cunningly worked this out at a time when Labour has a dearth of Lazarus figures, embracing Strictly Come Dancing and telling us how very bad he is going to be at it. As the key Gordon Brown acolyte, and a brainy one to boot, Balls was the character most despised by Blairite insiders. He didn’t fare much better as shadow chancellor in 2012, when a poll concluded that he was best known as opportunistic (44%), uncharismatic (50%) and unlikeable (48%).




Ann Widdecombe: My advice to Ed Balls on Strictly? Just follow my lead




So Balls did what all savvy politicians treated to a bucket of public manure should do. He discovered perfectly harmless, uncontroversial ways to make himself less disliked. He told us about making spaghetti and passing piano grades, quite slowly: now one really wants to hear that it took you just two years to get a grade 8. Crucially, such endeavours are poignantly described as “far more stressful” than high politics, just as the Strictly is “all a bit stressful”, according to the new twinkle-toed tweeter.
Do we sense a theme here? Successful ex-politicians work with the grain of modern public opinion, which is that we do not care if it was a nightmare working with Gordon Brown responding to a financial crash. Rich rewards await those who cleave instead to the heady glamour of everyday life and channel their showmanship accordingly. It is one of Tony Blair’s failures after leaving office – he’s never quite got the hang of doing anything that does not suggest he still thinks of himself as a de facto PM, from over-elaborate deals to commentaries on the referendum or interventions intended to sway the future of Labour (we’ll get back to you on that one).
The Balls/Strictly paradox relies on the improbability of a stodgy centre-left politician working on his chaînés turns. Imperfectly executed, it can change the minds of most of those who used to consider the Westminster veteran an absolute dork. The only risk to Balls is that being too good at it will dump him back in the “smug elites” camp.
My Radio 4 Moral Maze colleague Michael Portillo was once the guy who made unfortunate leadership bid speeches invoking the SAS, and the man people of a certain generation stayed up to see ejected from his seat in 1997. Nowadays he takes train journeys around the country and fills theatres talking about the days when he was unpopular, to tumultuous acclaim.
The ways to the English heart for the ousted MP are varied but fundamentally celebrate a fondness for trains, ballroom dancing and moderate sport. What might it be for Gove? The lesson of Portillo and Balls – both cerebral sorts – is not to do anything that reminds people of where you fought your great battles or the dividing lines, just as many small-c conservatives people who lapped up the Chris Mullin or Tony Benn diaries screened out the leftwing stances of the authors and turned them into soothing national treasures.




In the Tory laundry basket, Michael Gove is the dirtiest item | Marina Hyde




David Cameron instinctively understood that disappearing with an embarrassed cough was the response his party wanted after he failed to deliver Brexit – and taking a small daughter to pony school (if horses, make them small). Anyone more adventurous might turn back to the 19th-century model of a whiff of envy-provoking scandal. Tempted by the chance to kill off their great Liberal foe Lord Palmerston, Tories suggested to Disraeli that evidence of an illegitimate child by a much younger woman might be leaked as Palmerston neared 80. Disraeli, himself an expert in the art of the comeback, counselled against on the grounds that it could only make the old-timer more beloved.
The post-Brexit era politicians have experienced such swift reversals of fortune that they need to very quickly plan their own journey along the Balls-Portillo recovery route, or emulate thick-skinned populists who are both loved and loathed and enjoy life in the Marmite zone.
Interviewing Nigel Farage for a radio documentary on the Brexit camapaigns, I asked the insurgent whether he would consider a role, as rumoured, on Strictly. The Kentish man, full of disdain, shook his head.

Anne McElvoy is Senior Editor at The Economist. Her documentary, HowWe Voted Brexit , is on Radio 4 on 23 August at 20:00hrs


