
The international tax system is only as strong as its weakest link. This is the clear message that the European Commission sent on Tuesday when it announced that Apple will have to repay as much as €13bn ($14.5bn) in back taxes due to illegal Irish tax breaks it has received.
Tax justice advocates across the globe lauded the decision as a big step toward tax fairness. Unfortunately, an immediate critical response from US lawmakers, coupled with a slick and disingenuous public relations play from Apple CEO Tim Cook, suggests that American taxpayers will probably continue to pay the price for Apple’s tax dodging for some time to come. This is a shame, because the commission’s goal of ending tax haven abuse is one in which the United States should, and ultimately must, be a full participant.




Apple must now pay its taxes. This is a vindication of protest | Owen Jones




The facts of the Apple case are straightforward: with the blessing of the Irish government, Apple created a byzantine network of subsidiaries to shelter its profits in an entity that was a tax resident of no country. As a result, billions of dollars of Apple’s income have flowed almost tax free through Ireland’s tax system. The European Commission estimates that in 2014, one of Apple’s Irish affiliates paid a tax rate of just 0.005% on its Irish profits.
The commission ruling sensibly finds that this arrangement violates the EU’s “state aid” rules, giving Apple an unfair competitive advantage, recognizes that Irish taxpayers are potentially not the only victim of Apple’s tax avoidance and makes it clear that prompt action by US lawmakers could ensure that America sees its fair share of Apple’s big tax bill. 
But therein lies the rub: while the financial cost of multinational corporations’ offshore tax avoidance has long been clear (US-based Fortune 500 firms have more than $2.4tn parked offshore and are avoiding up to $695bn in US taxes), American lawmakers have demonstrated little appetite for enacting reforms needed to collect tax on this runaway cash. 
A current provision in the US tax law called “deferral” enables allows companies to indefinitely avoid paying even a dime of US tax on offshore profits if they leave them offshore.
These politicians understand that deferral means the US Treasury is missing a substantial amount of revenue that could be used to fund various public services. But for years, Congress and the Obama administration have failed to agree on legislation to compel US corporations to repatriate their offshore cash back to the United States.
To entice companies to repatriate offshore profits, President Obama has proposed a one-time tax on offshore cash at a reduced rate, and some Republicans have argued for a “tax holiday” that would allow Apple and other firms to repatriate their offshore profits at a rate as low as 5%.
This rightly has been met with public outcry as it essentially rewards Apple and other offshoring companies with a sharply reduced tax rate on profits that should be taxed fully.
Until US lawmakers agree to strengthen the nation’s tax laws, tax-avoiding companies such as Apple will relentlessly seek out willing governmental partners – like Ireland – to hide their assets. And when they find these partners, the tax systems of every other nation in which they do business are the primary victims. 
The series of recent European Commission rulings culminating in this week’s Apple decision have made it clear that European leaders recognize this and are set on stopping Irish and other politicians from subverting the tax systems of other European nations – and the United States. If US policymakers don’t take a page from the EU’s book and act promptly, the real victim of Apple’s Irish tax dodge will be American taxpayers. 

