Theresa May has taken her first major strategic decision. Hinkley C will go ahead, seven weeks after a pause instigated when the champagne to celebrate final approval was already on ice. The only change from a move that infuriated the Chinese and flummoxed the French investors appears to be a British veto on any sale of the Gallic interest during construction, and in future a new national security test for all foreign investment in critical infrastructure. All the pause really illustrates is that when it comes to nuclear, Britain is no longer a player in a world in which Russia and China vie to dominate.

China plans central role in UK nuclear industry after Hinkley Point approval Read more

Hinkley C is an unproven design that comes at a punitive cost. Given the bill that will finally be picked up by the British taxpayer, it could well be no riskier to make a commitment on a similar scale to building a smart energy network that delivers power efficiently. This approach could be complemented by investing more heavily in reducing demand through measures such as better insulation, while expanding renewables, whose costs are falling. Already offshore wind is the only source more costly than nuclear.

But nuclear clearly has some advantages. It is low carbon and Britain would struggle to meet its target of carbon-free energy by 2050 without it. It will keep the lights on in a way that most renewable energy cannot yet be relied upon to do, although the gap is narrowing as storage technology improves.

Unlike onshore windfarms, fracking or even extensive solar installations, all of which arouse powerful local opposition, most of the neighbours at Hinkley C want the investment. It will safeguard existing jobs and it will deliver new ones – as many as 25,000, it is estimated. British business is eagerly anticipating a supply-line bonanza. Most of all, after the shattering blow of the Brexit vote and its potential impact on foreign investment, it is hard to see how Mrs May could really risk withdrawing approval for Hinkley C.

In trying to exercise power, the prime minister has instead illustrated the constraints on her scope for action in an area where she has to maintain a fragile balance between national security, global investment and the demands of climate change politics. She could be forgiven for wishing she was starting somewhere else.

For nearly a decade, Hinkley C has been presented as the magic bullet that will keep the lights on for generations to come, and a prelude to a huge expansion of nuclear power to meet the rapidly increasing demand for energy and the need to take old, dirty and inefficient capacity out of service. But after some costly experiences, Britain has lost its nuclear know-how: by the time it was completed in 1995, the last nuclear power station to be built, Sizewell B in Suffolk, was 40% over budget and successive governments have retreated from such ambitious infrastructure investment. When, in 2006, Labour tentatively proposed putting nuclear back in the energy mix, it already appeared certain that new nuclear would be built with foreign expertise and capital.

British consumers will not bear the £18.5bn construction costs of Hinkley C. But nuclear is far too costly and too slow to produce a return to attract private sector investment without huge incentives. That is why EDF secured a guaranteed price for its electricity that is nearly double the current wholesale cost, for half of its planned lifetime; it is why the government has also underwritten construction costs by £2bn, and it explains the decision which so worried Mrs May, to allow Beijing to pick up a third of the cost as a quid pro quo for future permission to build at least one nuclear power station to its own design, at Bradwell in Essex.

The decision is made, but implementation will matter too. The benefits that the government is claiming for the project must be realised. The consumer must not end up with the bill for construction, jobs must come to Britain and above all, the technology has to work. But there is more to it than that. This is a tale that illustrates one of the basic lessons in the No 10 manual of governance: in a competitive field, energy policy is one of the hardest to get right. Keeping the lights on without adding to global warming at a price that consumers can afford is complex. And nuclear, with its lethal waste and high decommissioning costs, is no long-term solution; the worst judgment of all on Mrs May’s first big strategic choice is to find that it drives out investment in other, smarter, solutions which are the real technologies of the future.