
A week before the Olympics – before the US women’s team were the toast of the globe after winning the gold Tuesday evening – my niece decided that I needed to watch her perform gymnastics.
She bounced into splits and pulled herself up, James Brown style. Her second trick of the afternoon involved a handstand into backbend, and for her final performance, she threatened to do a flip, but was promptly stopped by my mother, who vied to save all her art pieces surrounding us. I tried to redirect my niece’s energy.




The extraordinary Simone Biles, the best athlete in America today




“Have you seen the US Olympic girls’ team?” I asked. I pulled out my smartphone, excited to bestow on her Simone Biles, Gabby Douglas and Laurie Hernandez, all three of whom have afro-roots (Douglas and Biles identify as African American, and Hernandez is Puerto Rican). But my little niece merely shrugged and said, “I’ve seen them.”
When I was my niece’s age, the Olympics showcased many great black female athletes, but we didn’t have the luxury of taking them for granted. Some were victorious, like Flo-Jo, who smashed records with her ratchet nails popping and fresh-pressed hair flying in the wind. Some endured an uphill battle like Surya Bonaly, whose very existence challenged European figure-skating standards with her strong build and her monstrous, one-blade back-flip that even the men couldn’t do. 
Then there was Olympic gymnast Dominique Dawes, who appeared on the gymnastics scene in Barcelona with such confidence one would have thought she’d always been there. I remember being in awe of her. Two years later, in 1996, Dawes, part of the “magnificent seven”, would win the gold. But she was the exception to my mind rather than the rule.
She still is. Today, most depictions of black bodies on TV aren’t there because they’re being feted, but because they’re being mourned. The most heartbreaking is the onslaught of viral videos and news stories carrying death via police brutality. I’ve cried many tears over the last two years, wondering what it takes for black women like me to be valued and loved by anyone.
Our athletes continue to shoulder the burden of change for us, existing loudly, gloriously, in spaces from which women of color were historically excluded. That is the epitome of the US women’s gymnastics team, as it burns so brightly with #BlackGirlMagic.
Douglas had already made history in London as the first black American to win the individual all-around and the first American gymnast to win gold in both the individual all-around and team competitions at the same Olympics. Laurie Hernandez made her mark had the internet dancing to her savvy floor routines. And Simone Biles has only made her Olympic debut, but did so as the first black American to be world all-around champion and the first woman of any race to win three consecutive world all-around titles. And she nailed the Olympics, too, helping lead her team to victory in team gymnastics in Rio.
For many of us, these three young women – more than half the team – serve as a much-needed reminder of what women of color can do. We have the ability to shape cultures, impact societies and excel against all institutional odds.
This is what my niece is used to seeing. She isn’t like me. She doesn’t yet know what the USA looks like without the Obamas. She doesn’t yet know that her mother’s vigilance to keep her hair natural comes from a cultural movement of self-love and care, and not just a state of birth. 
And she certainly does not yet know a US women’s Olympic gymnastics team without Gabby Douglas or Simone Biles. She takes seeing black excellence for granted, and a part of me hopes that she always does – that she’ll never know the ugly parts of the USA like I do. I hope she’ll never have to become keenly aware of societal standards that seek to limit us due to our gender, our melanin or whom we love. I hope all of this for my little niece, although sadly, a part of me suspects that it’s futile to do so.

