
My dog Dolly has an fine-tuned bullshit detector. The eight-year-old mutt I adopted from a New York City shelter knows when I’m feigning enthusiasm to take her out at 7am on a drizzly Saturday morning. She also knows that when I’m telling her to get off the sofa and go to her bed, it’s because I’m about to leave her at home – so she ignores me.




Dogs understand both words and intonation of human speech




She has an uncanny ability to know when I’m trying to get her to do something that’s not very fun. So the results on a new study that found dogs understand both what we’re saying to them – and how we’re saying it – came as no surprise. 
My dog doesn’t literally know the words I’m saying, I don’t think; she wraps them up in the context of my tone and body language. Be it my guilt over leaving Dolly behind when I go to work, or just a hangover, Dolly is never convinced when I’m pretending. No matter how hard I summon my squawking Dog Voice, there’s no fooling her.
She’ll turn her head the other way when she’s lying on the sofa. She’ll still be excited to go outside, but she’ll trot along a little slower than usual, be a little less interested in sniffing everything. But if I’m about to take her somewhere I know we’re both going to love, and I ask her with genuine aplomb if she wants to go on an adventure, she’ll spin around in circles urging me to hurry up, and gallop when we arrive. 
That is, I know without science telling me that my dog knows what I’m saying, because I’ve learned to understand what she is telling me. And people should be equally interested in defining animal intelligence this way – from the dog’s perspective – as we are in how well they adopt human concepts. A one-sided focus on how well they get us misses whether people are computing what their dog is trying to tell them. 
I’ll often be out with Dolly and we’ll meet another pup. Dolly’s tail will shoot up and flicker like a flame; she’ll puff her chest out and the hairs on the back of her neck will stand on end. In other words, she’s on alert and is ready to defend herself – and me – should she need to. However, usually the human tethered to the end of the other dog’s leash doesn’t read those signs – she just sees a wagging tail. “Oh look, she wants to play! She’s so friendly!” 
When it comes to her attitude toward fellow canines, friendly is not a word I’d use to describe my dog. She’s a stray from Puerto Rico, is a little bit older and has a bum leg – she’s vulnerable and, in the dog world, this translates as being on the defensive. She is communicating all of this. The other owners are just oblivious to it. I hope they understand their own canine companions better.
Not every tail wag was made equal. Rotating like a helicopter blade accompanied by wiggly butt, and Dolly’s saying: “I am literally about to take off with excitement.” But straight and flicking rapidly: she’s not sure what to make of the situation but thinks it’s probably bad, kind of like a person holding on to a baseball bat in the dead of night. 
It’s great to know that dogs are able to understand us, but we need to learn to understand them better. One of the deepest joys of dog ownership has been learning about my dog, getting to know her personality quirks and funny little tics. 
In the absence of language, all of that is communicated on their terms, not ours, and it’s up to us to figure it out. They may not speak, but that doesn’t mean they have nothing to say.

