It was bad news that Jeremy Corbyn was allowed to stand in the Labour leadership race. And I say that as a genuine Corbyn supporter.

Why? Because his probable retention of the Labour leadership will be nothing but a poisoned chalice. He will always be looking over his shoulder knowing that a core of centrists are looking to stab him in the back given the slightest excuse. Yes, the PLP have said they will get fully behind whoever is elected leader - but didn’t they say that less than a year ago when he was first elected?

Importantly, his hands will be tied on his most ambitious policies by the majority of unwilling centrists - policies like scrapping Trident or de-privatising the rail and energy industries. He might even be forced into the ultimate indignity of his party supporting bombing countries against his will. He’ll try to prevent that, of course, but then someone like Hilary Benn will stand up and make a rousing speech about the nobility of killing our enemies, and it’ll all happen anyway. What pacifist wants to stand at the helm of a ship like that?

Whatever anyone says to the contrary, Jeremy Corbyn will be leading a party that is deeply and incurably divided if he wins this leadership contest again, with no confidence or strength to really push forward – rather like an officer leading a bunch of mutinous privates over the top. “Yes, go on sir, we’re right behind you. Oops, mind those machine guns, won’t you?”

David Cameron makes comment about Corbyn being the Monty Python Black Knight

Such is the rather depressing future as it stands. But let’s look at an alternative reality, one in which Corbyn was denied the right to stand automatically. Unable to put his name on the ballot, he would almost certainly be forced into splitting off from Labour and forming his own party, a party that would provide a clear focus for hundreds of thousands of Labour members and millions of other disaffected poor and young voters looking for a real alternative to “politics as usual”. Perhaps he could call it the Unelectable Party in an ironic nod to his detractors. Only I suspect it wouldn’t actually be as unelectable as its name implied.

This would be a party truly united behind one leader, free to push forward with the policies he and his supporters really want and support. Policies like halting the creeping privatisation of schools and the NHS. Policies like rebalancing the books through positive economic reform and taxes levied on the richest in society rather than austerity cuts to the poorest, the disabled and those on welfare. Policies like renationalising the rail and energy industries which, in polls, a majority of the public have said they are in favour of. Policies like scrapping Trident and re-investing the money into things like healthcare, children’s centres and care for the elderly. He could even start implementing a vision for a foreign policy that involves compassion, understanding and talking to both sides, rather than listening to one and bombing the other (if indeed you choose to listen to anybody at all.)

The most ridiculous claims made about Jeremy Corbyn







11 show all The most ridiculous claims made about Jeremy Corbyn



















1/11 He called Hezbollah and Hamas ‘friends’ True. In a speech made to the Stop the War Coalition in 2009, Mr Corbyn called representatives from both groups “friends” after inviting them to Parliament. He later told Channel 4 he wanted both groups, who have factions designated as international terror organisations, to be “part of the debate” for the Middle East peace process. “I use (the word ‘friends’) in a collective way, saying our friends are prepared to talk,” he added. “Does it mean I agree with Hamas and what it does? No. Does it mean I agree with Hezbollah and what they do? No.” Reuters

2/11 ‘Jeremy Corbyn thinks the death of Osama bin Laden was a tragedy’ Partly false. David Cameron used this as a line of attack at the Conservative Party conference but appears to have left out all context from Mr Corbyn’s original remarks. In an 2011 interview on Iranian television, the then-backbencher said the fact the al-Qaeda leader was not put on trial was the tragedy, continuing: “The World Trade Center was a tragedy, the attack on Afghanistan was a tragedy, the war in Iraq was a tragedy.”

3/11 He is ‘haunted’ by the legacy of his ‘evil’ great-great-grandfather False. A Daily Express exposé revealed that the Labour leader’s ancestor, James Sargent, was the “despotic” master of a Victorian workhouse. Addressing the report at the Labour conference, Mr Corbyn said he had never heard of him before, adding: “I want to take this opportunity to apologise for not doing the decent thing and going back in time and having a chat with him about his appalling behaviour.”

4/11 Jeremy Corbyn raised a motion about ‘pigeon bombs’ in Parliament This one is true. On 21 May 2004, Mr Corbyn raised an early day motion entitled “pigeon bombs”, proposing that the House register being “appalled but barely surprised” that MI5 reportedly proposed to load pigeons with explosives as a weapon. The motion continued: “The House… believes that humans represent the most obscene, perverted, cruel, uncivilised and lethal species ever to inhabit the planet and looks forward to the day when the inevitable asteroid slams into the earth and wipes them out thus giving nature the opportunity to start again.” It was not carried.

5/11 He rides a Communist bicycle False. A report in The Times referred to Mr Corbyn, known for his cycling, riding a “Chairman Mao-style bicycle” earlier this year. “Less thorough journalists might have referred to it as just a bicycle, but no, so we have to conclude that whenever we see somebody on a bicycle from now on, there goes another supporter of Chairman Mao,” he later joked.

6/11 'Jeremy Corbyn will appoint a special minister for Jews' False so far. The Sun report in December was allegedly based on a “rumour” passed to the paper by a Daily Express columnist who has written pieces critical of the Labour leader in the past. The minister did not materialise in his shadow cabinet.

7/11 ‘Jeremy Corbyn wishes Britain would abolish its Army’ False. Another gem from The Sun took comments made at a Hiroshima remembrance parade in August 2012 where Mr Corbyn supported Costa Rica’s move to abolish it armed forces. “Wouldn’t it be wonderful if every politician around the world…abolished the army and took pride in the fact that they don’t have an army,” he added. The caveat that “every politician” must take the step suggests Mr Corbyn does not support UK disarmament just yet.

8/11 Jeremy Corbyn stole sandwiches meant for veterans False. The Guido Fawkes blog claimed that the Labour leader took sandwiches meant for veterans at at Battle of Britain memorial service in September but a photo later emerged showing him being handed one by Costa volunteers, who later confirmed they were given to all guests.

9/11 He missed the induction into the Queen’s privy council True. After much speculation about Mr Corbyn’s republican views and willingness to bow to the monarch, his office confirmed that he did not attend the official induction to the privy council because of a prior engagement, but did not rule out joining the body.

10/11 Jeremy Corbyn refuses to sing the national anthem. Partly true. The Labour leader was filmed standing in silence as God Save the Queen was sung at a Battle of Britain remembrance service but will reportedly sing it in future. Mr Corbyn was elusive on the issue in an interview, saying he would show memorials “respect in the proper way”, but sources said he would sing the anthem at future occasions.

11/11 He is a member of the All-Party Parliamentary Group for Cheese True. The group lists its purpose as the following: “To increase awareness of issues surrounding the dairy industry and focus on economic issues affecting the dairy industry and producers.”

By being forced into this split, Corbyn would be taking the initiative rather than handing it back to the centrist MPs who, with him as re-elected leader, could stage their own walk-out, leaving him looking like the weak and lonely leader of a failing party.

If this all sounds a bit like a marriage on the rocks, that’s because it is. When a relationship turns tired and stale, sometimes the best thing for everyone is to stop trying to fix it and make a clean break. Corbyn has missed the chance to make that break. Now, instead of the one doing the leaving, he may be the one left behind.