
I landed in the United States as a child. My father was waiting for us. In a nod to the local western culture, he was wearing this strange thing on his head, a cowboy hat, and not recognizing him at first, I began to cry. My father was in Wyoming – truly the wild west – on a Fulbright fellowship, and my mother and I joined him several months into his tenure. 




Tell us how you got here: share your stories of immigration




He loved cowboy culture: he had watched all the American westerns in Poland. We planned to return there once the fellowship ended. In fact, my parents were so sure of this that they had brought very little with them. Even prized possessions like family photographs and my grandmother’s handwritten recipe book were left behind. 
We ended up staying much longer than expected. The political situation in Poland had changed for the worse in the early 1980s with the rise of nationwide strikes led by the Solidarity movement, a massive opposition movement. There was talk of Soviet intervention. My father’s colleagues in Poland began to advise him against returning, as did some local folks in Wyoming. 
Wyoming is a small place, and my father was soon introduced to its lone member in the US House of Representatives, a fellow by the name of Dick Cheney. Cheney, a staunch anti-communist, met my father and encouraged him to defect and stay in the US. Don’t worry, he said, Reagan will soon be president, and we will sort out all the immigration matters. Political asylum would be a slam dunk, he predicted. 
We stayed. 
The immigration matters, it turns out, were a bit harder to sort out than Cheney predicted. Visas for Fulbright fellowships come with strict requirements to return to one’s home country for at least two years. Cheney and other prominent people made a valiant effort, but the immigration bureaucracy pushed back. 




America accepted me – an Algerian Muslim – in a way France never did | Melyssa Haffaf




After several years of being out of status (we had UN refugee passports), we were granted political asylum – which we received, coincidentally, the same year as Reagan’s 1986 general amnesty for undocumented immigrants. Amnesty: a word that has become politically toxic today among the Republican set, even as a Republican legend was the first to implement it – helped us to gain legal status once and for all, six years after we decided to stay. 
We lived for several years in small-town Wyoming before moving on to the excitement of California. As one of the few immigrant families in small-town Wyoming we stuck out like a sore thumb. But everyone wanted to help. A stranger paid our rent. In California, we were among oceans of immigrants just like us, but we were often alone. 
When generalized, the immigrant story is cliché. But to each individual immigrant, his or her story is extraordinary. A character in one of Jhumpa Lahiri’s stories, an immigrant to the United States, expresses this best when he observes that he is not the “only man to seek his fortune far from home” but nevertheless is “bewildered by each mile” he has traveled. “As ordinary as it all appears,” he says, “there are times when it is beyond my imagination.” 
My father enjoyed a successful career as a chemist in California, and this year was the recipient of a major award from the American Chemical Society for his work. We all attended the award banquet, where many of the honorees were immigrants or former refugees. 
Anyone who witnessed this event would be living in a total vacuum if they did not notice the sad irony of the heated anti-refugee, anti-immigrant and anti-Muslim rhetoric in our current political campaign juxtaposed with the lasting contributions that a refugee from communist Poland, a Muslim immigrant from Egypt and countless others have made to the United States through chemistry alone. 
Just a year ago I would have thought this a cliché not worth repeating, but these days maybe it’s important to repeat often. My brother is a successful manager in a well-regarded company. And both my younger sister and I went on to serve the United States as diplomats, and American Fulbright fellows overseas. In a twist of fate, as a US diplomat, I had to deal with cases of Fulbright scholars who wanted an exception to the “two-year” rule. 
All of this may seem ordinary – but it’s not, and in many ways it is uniquely possible in the United States.




My American dream led to a trailer park. And I couldn't be happier | Simon McMuller




Representative Cheney, the original champion of our immigration case, became vice-president Cheney and a principal supporter of the 2003 invasion of Iraq. In another twist of fate, I ended up trying to undo some of the mess that resulted from the war that Mr Cheney had so fervently advocated in my final diplomatic assignment in Iraq. And yet I will always be grateful to him for his role in helping to make the USA my home.

