
Like most millennials, I strongly oppose Donald Trump and will not vote for him in the upcoming election. That doesn’t mean, though, that I’d never vote for any other Trump.
Republicans and even some Democrats piled on the praise for Ivanka Trump after her remarks at the Republican national convention in Cleveland. She – and the rest of the adult Trump kids – stole the show throughout the week.




Trump's childcare plan is good for the rich. But what about the rest of us? | Carmel Martin




Ivanka in particular has all her father’s “pros” and almost none of his incredibly off-putting cons. She has balanced motherhood with owning her own company. She has been successful in practically every area of business, including her work as an author, all while keeping a certain amount of traditional femininity that Republicans still praise. She came into the political spotlight as an outsider but has proven she has plenty of acumen on the campaign trail, at the same level or even beyond that of her father. She has access to the Trump family’s self-funding resources. She would even have Donald Trump himself at her disposal as a fiercely loyal supporter unafraid to speak his mind on camera.
In addition to bringing a sharp sense of business management and outside perspective, Ivanka doesn’t carry the same downsides as Donald. She has managed to stay above her father’s controversial statements about birth certificates, immigration and war heroes. She doesn’t have a combative relationship with the press or drive away young and Hispanic voters. Throughout the 2016 campaign, Ivanka has remained poised, well-spoken and relatable.
Bonus: Ivanka Trump cancels out Hillary Clinton’s “woman” card.
There are many incredible Republican women, both elected and in leadership, but the GOP has yet to secure a serious female presidential contender. This perpetuates the stereotype that the party consists of mostly old white men, especially since the presidential race gets more news coverage than any other campaign. While the stereotype doesn’t hold true down-ballot, the past few Republican presidential candidates haven’t helped the GOP image problem regardless of the broad choices at the start of the primary.
The Trumps intimately understand the importance of image. Ivanka’s image includes her own lovely features and her picture-perfect all-American family. If she ran on a Republican ticket, she’d be hard to ignore.
In addition to her non-political qualities, we have already seen the kind of policies Ivanka would want to focus on in a hypothetical run for office. Her convention speech touched on some controversial ideas among conservatives, such as the role of the government in paid maternity leave and childcare (she was instrumental in crafting her father’s policy in that area). 
How the federal government should approach these issues is still up for debate among both parties, but Ivanka’s raising the issue shows how in touch she is with the real-world problems facing Americans. Ivanka showed both an awareness of these challenges and a certain sensitivity that her father lacks. Her openness about her own family, including adorable pictures of her new baby, probably doesn’t hurt either.
She also focused on the importance of equal opportunity for all. Both Trumps have hired and promoted women for leadership positions, but Ivanka doesn’t have any on-the-record sexist comments to accompany hers. In fact, when she talked about her father hiring the best person for the for the job, it became quite clear that Donald’s faith in his daughter was not misplaced. She offered a far more convincing profile of her father as a smart and caring businessman than anything Trump has said on his own.
Many Trump supporters argue that their candidate is a real person, unlike the “establishment” politicians in Washington. But the Trump brand – plastered across casinos, hotels and televisions shows – has made Donald larger than real life. 
Ivanka, on the other hand, posts Instagram photos without makeup, is frank about her motherhood and retains a down-to-earth persona effortlessly exuded during her meetings with voters. A strong woman who has managed to balance her family and success seems like a no-brainer.
Even though Ivanka turns 35 next month, making her eligible for the office of commander-in-chief, she sadly won’t be on the ballot in place of her dad. But since family dynasties have been in political fashion for the past 15 years in the US, she might consider what she could bring to the GOP in future races.

