
There will be “no new search for cuts in individual welfare benefits” the secretary of state for work and pensions, Damian Green, has pledged. Not much news there, then. Green’s predecessor, Stephen Crabb, made the same promise in March, as a jittery Treasury sought to placate the Tory backbench revolt over cuts to disability benefits. The former chancellor George Osborne may be gone, but his welfare spending strategy remains largely intact for now.
During his Andrew Marr Show interview at the weekend Green made it sound like his “no more benefit raids” pledge was a sign that the austerity agenda was over. But it is not. Green confirmed that inherited current and planned cuts, amounting to billions of pounds by the end of the decade, would go ahead.
The language of welfare may well be less abrasive under Green, and his compassionate conservative presentation of welfare reform may aspire to be softer, but without material change, the net effect of the cuts will be the same as it would have been had Osborne still been in post: the living standards of millions of “just managing” low-income working households will continue to suffer, and the very poorest and most vulnerable will become poorer.




No more welfare cuts to come under Theresa May, says minister




Claimants might breathe a sigh of relief that no more cuts are expected, but even Osborne had by the end, via the tax credits U-turn and the personal independence payments (PIP) fiasco, crashed into the limits of what was politically possible. When you have frozen working-age benefit rates until the end of the decade, taking £7bn from the pockets of the less well-off at a time when living costs are rising, and are steaming ahead with a nasty household benefit cap that in theory will save the taxpayer £100m a year but push 250,000 children into even deeper poverty, how much further can you go?
That is to name just two social security cuts. Billions more are planned between now and 2020: there are relatively high-profile measures, such as £30 a week cuts to employment and support allowance payments for chronically ill and disabled people found unfit for work; and there is the gradual introduction of more technical cuts buried in universal credit amounting to over £7bn by 2020, such as the two child limit, and reductions to work allowances.
The true test of Green’s compassionate conservatism (and prime minister Theresa May’s promise to look out for the interests of struggling low-income working families) is not tone and language, important though that can be: it will be the extent to which they roll back cuts introduced under Osborne. The boldest move would be to reverse the Treasury reduction to work allowances in universal credit: costly, yes, but possible, given there are seemingly no tight Osbornian fiscal targets to adhere to, and arguably essential, unless ministers wish to see a catastrophic re-run of the tax credits uproar.
It is not just in the realm of policy that Green could make a break with the past. The day-to-day operation of the social security system (especially in universal credit) is crude, inflexible and too often oppressive. The rise in benefit sanctions penalties in recent years (notwithstanding recent falls in sanction levels) have highlighted the extent to which “customers” (as the Department of Work and Pensions insists on calling them) are too frequently treated with computer-says-no brutality. Jobcentre Plus culture is a problem: the dignity of the ”customer”, as Ken Loach’s award-winning film about to open in UK cinemas, I, Daniel Blake, will attest, never seems high on ministers’ agenda.




Universal credit is undeliverable: but who'll tell ministers the truth?




There is plenty that can be done to make universal credit more operationally humane: Green could make a start on this by scrapping the notorious six-week wait for a first universal credit payment, a rule dubbed “a recruiting sergeant for food banks” by Frank Field MP for its unerring ability to pitch low-income claimants into avoidable debt, rent arrears and food poverty. Green may also want to look again at the potentially explosive plans, currently being trialled, to introduce conditionality for low-paid workers on universal credit. Fining a claimant for not turning up to a jobcentre interview because they were at work is not a convincing advert for “making work pay”.
Green and May will have to accept that the social security system is, as the Fabian Society recently pointed out, rapidly becoming unfit for purpose. There are huge imbalances in who benefits: between working age recipients (who have shouldered the austerity burden) and pensioners (relatively unscathed); and between those on low incomes (who took the biggest hit), and the wealthy (who, according to the Fabians will by 2020 receive more financial support from the state in the form of personal tax allowances than poorer families will on benefits).
Green signalled at the weekend that he wanted to tackle intergenerational unfairness, and so he should (though he said he was against cuts to pensioner benefits). The Resolution Foundation recently calculated that current Tory tax and benefit plans will redistribute billions from young to old over the next four years. It is early days, but it is not yet clear whether this government, with a prime minister who openly proclaims her one nation credentials, really has the guts or the imagination to seriously tackle inequality and poverty. We are about to find out.

