
In an election result that finds the ultimate victor struggling to act victorious and the vanquished being lauded as triumphant, there is one clear-cut winner: the political opinion polls.
All the five major national polls predicted primary votes for the major parties within the standard 3% margin of error for a sample of 1000 and a two-party preferred vote within one percentage point of being on the money.
While the betting markets and professional pundits were predicting a comfortable victory, it was the polls that refused to deviate far from 50:50 throughout the long campaign. 
What’s interesting about these results is that they were recorded using varying data techniques designed to meet the challenges of engaging a representative sample.




Malcolm Turnbull signals likely challenge in Herbert after Labor claims victory




The Essential Report is based on an incentivised online panel, quota sampled and weighted to correct for the known political bias in the panel. 
Reachtel runs “robos” – a fully automated pre-recorded message to landlines that asks respondents to push buttons on their handset to gauge their views. These deliver a large sample at a bargain price but has an extremely low response rate. Any skew is corrected by an algorithm that matches the response to observed patterns.
Ipsos, the new pollster on the Australian political block for Fairfax, uses traditional phone polling, but mix landlines and mobiles to build its representative sample.
Meanwhile Galaxy runs its own poll and provides the field work for Newspoll using a mix of an online panel and robos. The difference in result? The Newspoll was taken closer to election day.
Based on the below numbers Newspoll narrowly emerges with bragging rights from our own Essential Report. But apart from Ipsos’s slightly high Greens vote, all the pollsters will be pretty satisfied with their performance 

2016 election results and pollsters' predictions


2 party preferred

In contrast, the betting agencies barely survived with their pools intact, let alone their dignity having blown Labor out to $8.00 on election eve and the Coalition coasting to victory at $1.08.
And in the battle of the individual seats there were some spectacular wrong calls by the bookies.
 They missed nearly half the individual seats that went to Labor: in Bass, Braddon, Cowan, Hindmarsh, Lindsay, Longman, Macquarie and Macarthur the Liberals were at much shorter odds than Labor. They also totally missed Chisholm going to Libs (then again, who didn’t?). The betting odds also predicted the LNP would lose Capricornia, Petrie, Page, Cowper. But, whatever.
Of course the bookies were driven by the noise of the pundits who as the election approached seemed to believe their own rhetoric.
Turnbull had “grown” during the campaign according to the Sydney Morning Herald, he was a “popular figurehead” according to the Australian Financial Review; his was the “coherent vision” for the nation according to the Australian.
The Murdoch tabloids were even further from the mark – the Daily Telegraph turned it into cartoon capers, dressing Shorten as “Bill-nocchio” and delighted in every negative poll. Their only pro-Labor intervention was “Save Albo” and it probably worked against the Labor deputy.
And then there was the Herald Sun which, over the course of the campaign, ran more than a dozen pages manufacturing a political crisis within the CFA and attempting to turn it into a federal election issue.
But the actual voting results shows this was a dismal failure, as Victorian Labor official Kosmos Samaras has noted, in the seats where the CFA had the strongest presence the Labor vote actually went up. 
Only the Sunday Age recommended a vote for Labor on the basis of its more coherent policy and this editorial seemed more quixotic than predictive.
The group consensus of pundits and bookies distorted the election narrative until, I must confess, some pollsters were doubting their numbers and wondering if we were on our way to a repeat of the misdiagnosis of the 2015 UK general elections when the pollsters crashed and burned.
From the comfortable vantage point of hindsight, though, the close result makes perfect sense.
In one corner a clearly disunited government with conflicted social policy, a trickle-down economic agenda focused on a massive company tax cut and – despite a couple of flirtations – a leader too decent to stoop into border protection divisiveness.




Federal election 2016 results: every state at a glance




In the other, a united Labor opposition with some real policies on negative gearing and capital gains, a commitment to bubble up economics through education and inclusion, and a sweet spot on health that cashed in on the misdeeds of the Coalition over its full term.
Add a committed progressive movement that delivered a sophisticated ground campaign that included voter identification and persuasive conversations and savvy digital micro-targeting.
Line it all up and it is unsurprising that Labor ran close to making political history and wiping out a first term government for the first time since the Depression
But the outcome of every election is obvious in hindsight: it’s understanding it in real-time that is the trick. That’s why polling is an important part of the political mix, because it takes emotion and prejudice out and just looks at the stated intentions of voters. 
And in 2016 it’s fair to conclude that while just about everyone else was surprised by the close run race, the polls got it right.

