
On 20 August, the Kent branch of BHS where I worked closed its doors, after the slow and undignified liquidation process was completed. By the time the “Last Few Days” signs went up, I could barely recall how the shopfloor had looked back when the shelves were overflowing with merchandise and I was kept busy ensuring that my section remained fully stocked and tidy. As the store began to resemble a post-apocalyptic approximation of its former self, I increasingly found myself with nothing to do but walk pointless circuits around the near-empty expanse of the ground floor.
As the weeks dragged on and unemployment loomed, my thoughts would inevitably turn to our old boss, Philip Green, who by this point had taken delivery of his third yacht and was sailing aimlessly around the Greek islands, enjoying the fruits of our labours. When my shift in Tunbridge Wells ended each day, I would return home and check for the latest news online regarding Green, hoping to find some consolatory announcement that the Serious Fraud Office had uncovered evidence of wrongdoing and issued a warrant for his arrest, or perhaps that the mighty Lionheart had sprung a leak.
I had to make do instead with the amusing spectacle of a cornered Phil throwing a tantrum and threatening to hurl a television camera into the sea. The Sky News footage of him stomping around, behaving like a cross between a belligerent toddler and Mr Toad, lifted my spirits briefly. Sadly, however, the novelty of this short video wore off after repeated viewings, and I was soon back on Google searching fruitlessly for news of his comeuppance.




Diary of a BHS worker: ‘If there were a Dignitas for department stores, I would make the call’




I wasn’t at work on the final day of trading, but I was for the subsequent two mornings, when employees were required to come in and ensure that all signs of life were removed from the building. We spent Sunday morning throwing whatever odds and ends were lying around into a giant skip in the store’s loading bay. Staff went through everything to see if there was anything worth scavenging, but little was of any real use. I pocketed a metal tape measure, despite a total lack of interest in DIY.
Once the general detritus had been disposed of, the remainder of these two shifts was a waste of everyone’s time. I spent several hours kicking a football around the now-empty ground floor. There was no tearful farewell to the old building as we exited the front doors for the last time, because, having sat in the stifling heat doing nothing for the previous three hours, we were all desperate to stretch our legs and feel some fresh air on our faces. No one even looked back, as far as I recall.
Predictably, the day ended in a long session at a local pub, catching up with staff members who had already left, and saying our final farewells. With the booze flowing freely, things got predictably raucous. Among the chaos there was much hugging and countless promises made to keep in touch with one another.
I’m pleased to say that a great many of my colleagues have, despite the lack of assistance from BHS and the inconvenience of not knowing exactly when the store would close, already found new employers. Most seem to have opted to stay working in retail. Hopefully, in terms of pay and conditions, their new jobs will prove to be an upgrade on life at BHS. Hopefully, too, their new employers will prove to be less unscrupulous and greedy than the likes of Green and Dominic Chappell, and will be appreciative of their new employees’ hard work and loyalty.
As for my own future, the job hunt continues. Like many of the 11,000 left unemployed by this fiasco, I have filled in the online forms necessary to claim my redundancy payment and am now waiting the three to six weeks it takes to process such applications. Between that and what’s left of my final wage packet, I hope I’ll be able to remain fed and sheltered while I contemplate my next move. I have my heart set on making an escape from the world of shelf-stacking and finding something more rewarding.
Since my Guardian debut in July, several people have suggested that I should pursue a writing career. I would certainly like to give it my best shot, but in the meantime, if anyone happens to know of any good jobs going that might suit a deeply cynical 43-year-old whose key skills include folding towels and writing slightly bleak yet comical portraits of ramshackle department stores, do please get in touch via Twitter @GrantAtterbury.

