
Republicans face a lot of difficult decisions this year, but for the party to come back strong after Donald Trump’s divisive candidacy – for it to keep its brand as the free-market, democracy-loving, opportunity-focused alternative to the Democrats – the least-worst option is a major loss in the presidential race. 




The Donald Trump tipping point: Republicans on when they said 'no more'




By selecting a nominee who does not reflect the usual fiscal policies, a victory for Trump will mean a shift in the party’s focus. Even if the rest of the GOP holds fast to the platform or to traditional conservative values, the president’s policies always reshape the party. 
If you have ever promoted a local candidate to voters, you know this is true – the public looks at the top of the ticket first and judges the party by that person’s views. Many Trump supporters will see his win as a referendum on their policies and will work to make the party reflect that. Fellow Republicans will either need to accept that or leave. 
We have no idea what a Trump presidency will look like, but based on his campaign, it will be filled with outrageous gaffes, inarticulate interviews on policy and offensive media blitzes focused on non-issues. Trump will most likely lose minorities and women, creating a wider divide that the GOP must bridge in the future. Many young voters will continue to associate Trump with the party long after he leaves office. This would only further damage Republicans and set us up for heavy losses in 2018.
Not to mention the party will continue to hemorrhage its best and brightest. Candidates, staff and volunteers have already walked away from Trump, and there’s no question it will keep happening. If Trump gains a greater control of the party, these people might even be forced out.
But let’s say Trump doesn’t win and Hillary Clinton claims the White House. If Trump only trails her by a few points, you can bet he will blame the Republicans who voted their conscience. Or he’ll kick up dirt over the “rigged” system, as he has already alluded to. Trump supporters in the party will go on a witch-hunt, looking for anyone who acted disloyally to the Republican nominee. That in-fighting could destroy the party. 
Only a loss by a wide margin would send a clear message to the Republican party: this is the wrong choice for America. If Trump loses the swing states and also sees lower numbers in deeply red states, the party would have to accept that even Republicans could not vote for this candidate.
This doesn’t mean Republicans need to lose down-ballot, though Trump will make it an uphill battle. The GOP has a strong hold on the House of Representatives, which is unlikely to be shaken this election (though a President Trump could alter that security in two years). Red states won’t suddenly lose their conservative ideals and vote out the representatives that reflect them.




Trump has gone totally off the rails. Will his base finally notice? | Richard Wolffe




Even the Senate could remain in Republican control if the RNC focuses on securing weak candidates. Those worried that a vote for Trump is the only way to balance the US supreme court should refocus their efforts on the Senate, where the real decisions are made. Without the Senate’s approval, a permanent supreme court justice cannot be appointed. All is not lost without the presidency; Congress is still the power behind the throne.
Republicans need to take a sincere look at how we run our primaries. We also need to find ways to address the concerns of members who voted for Trump – without losing sight of what it means to be a Republican. This will take time, and the healing will be slow. But a stronger party could rise up, and unlike many Trump supporters, the Republicans who will not vote for Trump will happily return to rebuild the GOP if they are invited.

