
So a woman judge is abused as “a bit of a cunt” who should “go fuck yourself” by a racist thug whom she has just jailed. She hits back that he too is “a bit of a cunt” and he too should fuck off. To adapt Oscar Wilde on the death of Little Nell, it would take a heart of stone not to cheer.
Judge Patricia Lynch QC has duly become a hero to the retributive classes. Give these people a taste of their own medicine, is the cry. Show them who is boss. Meanwhile, there are inevitable complaints to the Judicial Conduct Investigations Office. Is this an appropriate way to sentence a man to a year and half in prison? Is this how we expect our judges to behave?
The best answer in this case is clearly to forget it. Neither antagonist is likely to gain from further inquiry into what was a spur of the moment exchange. The judge is clearly vulnerable to the charge of sinking to the level of the man she was jailing, ironically for using abusive language in a public place. Her heroism must also be heavily larded with gender bias. Would the social media have idolised a white male judge who used such words in convicting a woman?
Yet such vignettes focus attention on everyday life in a British crown court. The accused, John Hennigan, was convicted of a ninth breach of an antisocial behaviour order in 11 years. This and previous breaches mostly involved shouting abuse and making Nazi gestures at various people, including ethnic minorities.




Complaints made after judge trades insults with defendant in court




According to Hennigan’s defence lawyer, he is “an unfortunate man … diagnosed and medicated for depression”. He is single, obese and lives alone. It must be inconceivable that a few months in jail will rehabilitate, deter or in any way make this man better able to control himself. It will only briefly relieve those whom he has upset by his behaviour. More likely, jail will make his life and his behaviour considerably worse.
Hennigan is clearly an antisocial menace. But asbos are discredited as forms of public discipline, both for their heavy-handedness and for lack of evidence that they are any real deterrent to bad behaviour. Putting offenders in prison is a nuclear option, as against other forms of community punishment or restraint. Yet British judges do so with a frequency unknown in other European countries, and at ever growing cost to the state.
Of course the judge should not have said what she said. But the fracas will have been worth it if someone asks why she felt it in the best interests of society for this troubled man to have the rest of his life blighted by a prison record.

