
So your politician did something with his penis. In an age of duelling sympathies – free speech v invasion of privacy, opposing revenge porn v exposing moralistic hypocrisy – it can be difficult to navigate quite how to feel. Should we care? Should we rage? Should we leave adult human beings to manage their own genitals? Should adult human beings who apparently cannot even be trusted to keep their own genital secrets a secret be trusted with very important big secrets, such as the President’s Book of Secrets?
Well, it depends.
In Britain this week, an exposé by the Sunday Mirror revealed MP Keith Vaz allegedly enlisting the services of two male sex workers and offering to pay for cocaine. The tabloid justified its intrusion into Vaz’s private life by arguing that his position as chair of the home affairs select committee – which, after an extensive inquiry, recently recommended the decriminalisation of sex work – constituted a conflict of interest (Vaz has now resigned from the committee).
That stance has been taken up and loudly championed by opponents of full decriminalisation, eager to use Vaz’s personal violation as a cudgel to discredit the committee’s findings. As Joan Smith wrote in this paper: “To put it bluntly, he appears to have chaired hearings where campaigners proposed a change in the law that could, in theory, turn his own private behaviour into a criminal offence.”
In the US last week, former congressman Anthony Weiner strode boldly into yet another sexting scandal (his third), his passion for a career and a marriage apparently superseded by his passion for showing strange ladies what the outline of his penis looks like in boxer briefs. Which is fine, of course. We all have our hobbies and priorities. (Perhaps, though, Weiner’s lot is more accurately characterised not as a life intermittently derailed by public tumescence but as one long, continuous sext with the occasional breather.)
This time around, Weiner upped the grimace factor by taking a photo of his activated crotch about six inches from the head of his sleeping toddler. He also used that one-big-eye-one-small-eye-waggy-tongue emoji a lot, which should be illegal.
And by sending his penis pics to a “busty brunette” Trump supporter who gleefully made them public, Weiner handed the GOP fodder for several weeks of significance-free yowling about Hillary Clinton, whose longtime aide, Huma Abedin, happens to be Weiner’s now-estranged wife. The implicit message in the Abedin melee is the same one that has clung to Clinton for decades: “If she can’t even satisfy her husband, how can she possibly satisfy America?” (Because this retrograde country’s first female president can’t just be a politician – she’ll also have to be America’s wife and mommy.)








  

Anthony Weiner, as then New York mayoral candidate, with his now-estranged wife and longtime Hillary Clinton aide Huma Abedin in 2013. Photograph: Kathy Willens/AP


The case for the newsworthiness of the Weiner scandal appears to be that his name is Weiner and he does things with his wiener. Which – I get it – is a small joy in a grim world. But, as sex columnist Dan Savage notes, our love of a lurid tabloid story and a penis pun really doesn’t justify posting someone’s private sex pics without their consent:
“Making private sext messages public? Do it to anyone else, you’re the asshole. Do it to Anthony Weiner, he’s the asshole. Why the double standard? Posting dirty pictures or videos that were shared with you privately – or made with you privately – without the consent of the person in those pictures or videos is called revenge porn and it’s a crime in many states.”
So how do you tell if you’re looking at a newsworthy sex scandal or a prurient, exploitative one? Pretty simple. Just ask yourself:
1. Was this politician engaged in legal, consensual penis shenanigans (cheating, sexting, canoodling) or wicked, life-ruining penis crime (sexual harassment, rape, domestic violence, child pornography)?
2. In their capacity as a lawmaker, did this politician push oppressive, socially conservative legislation that regulated or criminalised the consensual, private sex lives of others? Did they yell all the time about gay people burning in hell or encourage parents to send their kids to abusive gay conversion camps or vote against anti-discrimination laws, while soliciting same-sex blowjobs in public toilets? Did they insist that abortion is baby-murder while procuring expensive secret abortions for their mistresses and daughters?
If the answer to 1 is “crime” or the answer to 2 is “YUP,” or if you’ve got yourself a twofer like former US house speaker Denny Hastert, then congrats! That’s a scandal that actually means something. If not, and, on top of everything, you find yourself gawking at someone’s private correspondence that’s been dredged up by vultures or homophobes with an agenda, maybe take a pass.
By this metric, political stings for prostitution only matter if you believe that paying for sex should be criminalised (I don’t – I prefer to listen to sex workers when they tell us what keeps them safe). And Weiner’s escapade is a non-event. He’s not even a politician any more – just a guy who probably shouldn’t be in a monogamous marriage and wants to show his penis off to brunettes in the (illusory) privacy of his own phone. I understand why Abedin would care. It is hard for me to care.
Come on. Stop. Talk about real stuff, not this sideshow. (Also, abolish that emoji.)

