
The first fact mentioned in the new report on prostitution by the home affairs select committee is that “around 11% of British men aged 16–74 have paid for sex on at least one occasion”. The home affairs select committee is composed of eight men and three women. Given the men’s ages, their resources and arguably enhanced opportunities, as MPs, to conclude such transactions, maybe it is not so remarkable that at least one of the parliamentarians deciding on the future legality of prostitution may also have been a sex buyer.
It’s more surprising, really, that no one on the committee, principally its chairman, Keith Vaz, seems to have questioned whether, with that level of gender imbalance, it was the ideal investigator of the overwhelmingly gendered issue of prostitution. During its second hearing, an entirely male committee would question two women, both former sex workers. Vaz assured witnesses that he approached the hearings with no “preconceived views”, as required. “After we have completed our inquiry, parliament probably will not look at this again for many years.”
There was, back then, no obvious reason to doubt his sincerity. As with so many Westminster scandals, insiders have been quick to assure the public that they always found this fallen star distinctly creepy – “fishy,” said one. As a more gullible spectator, I was inclined, if I never noticed anything actively virtuous about this MP, to assume there must be some basis for his occasionally homiletic manner. Vaz has not been reluctant, for instance, to shake his head over threats to “moral development”, or to diagnose hypocrisy, or to draw attention to his endearing naivety, in comparison with worldly colleagues, where a sex-related commodity such as poppers is concerned. Besides, some superior qualities must have earned him the chairmanship from which he last week resigned, having allegedly paid two Romanian prostitutes for sex.
For his supporters, of course, none of this, any more than his alleged unsafe sex or companions’ use of cocaine (and poppers), has a bearing on the Vaz prostitution report. We would not, Peter Tatchell argued, “demand that MPs who drink and smoke declare an interest when they discuss legislation affecting the alcohol and cigarette industries”. No, not unless the covert smoker or drinker in question were an esteemed committee chair tasked with advising parliament on prohibition (or its opposite) and was later shown to have feigned complete ignorance of the habit. That degree of concealment might well fascinate the public.
Earlier this year, the chief medical officer, Dame Sally Davies, having exhorted the nation to copy her in drinking tea, not wine, was pilloried after photographs emerged suggesting only inconsistent domestic enforcement of her rule.
On the other hand, if personal habits – Davies’s occasional glass, Vaz’s alleged use of prostitutes – really have no bearing on their official advice, this is marvellous news for MPs on all sides, from surreptitiously devout opponents of the right to die to the Labour elite now struggling, having sent their own children to strenuously selective schools, to muster some non-hilarious-looking opposition to Theresa May’s revival of grammars.
Far from being some weird, thoroughly sex-minded exception to an indulgent rule, public interest in Vaz’s alleged involvement in prostitution surely accords with a growing expectation of openness from – or refusal to be lectured by – MPs whose personal sympathies, as well as personal finances, can shape legislation. Though in Vaz’s case, maybe these could have been guessed at.
Long before leading the inquiry, he advertised, in a 2009 debate, his opposition to interfering with paying sexual transactions. To be fair, a tender concern for prostitutes, or fallen women as they used to be known, is something of a parliamentary tradition, dating at least back to Gladstone. “Ministers have used the phrase, ‘Let us tackle the demand for sex,’” Vaz objected. “We cannot just say to people, ‘Do not have sex’, or, ‘Do not have sex in these circumstances’; governments should not be involved, in my view, in making such statements.”
Presumably this very clear position changed at some point before he assumed command of a government inquiry set up to, among other things, examine the “demand which drives commercial sexual exploitation”. Anyway, full disclosure: I was recently a member of a commission that supported the introduction in Britain of “Nordic model” legislation that aims, precisely in the way once unacceptable to Vaz, to reduce demand for prostitution by penalising the buyers and not, as now, the sellers of sex. Introduced in Sweden in 1999, and now enacted, with variations, in four more countries, including France, the legislation proceeds from the principle, endorsed by the European parliament and many women’s organisations (and opposed by an equally vehement lobby), that prostitution amounts to acutely gendered exploitation, with horrifying costs to the many of the women and girls whose bodies are thus commodified.
To take just one figure that emerged in the Vaz hearings, when assistant chief constable Nikki Holland wanted to illustrate prostituted women’s vulnerability: “We have had 153 murders since 1990, which is probably the highest group of murders in any one category, so that gives the police cause for concern.”
But murders, such as those of five women in Ipswich, and a recent homicide in Leeds, did not appear to worry Mr Vaz overmuch. He was more captivated, for no obvious reason, by the number of eastern Europeans in prostitution and, equally, with websites where, he explained to uninitiated witnesses, young women advertise for “sugar daddies”. “Is it perfectly fine,” he pressed, “if they do this with consent on either side?” What was wrong, he persisted, with “two consenting adults being able to come to an arrangement such as a prostitute would have with someone who is involved with her? What role does the state have in this?”
Thanks to the Sunday Mirror, his chairmanship can now be understood as something more complex than, as it earlier appeared, mingled indifference and inattention. Indeed, to go over these transcripts is not unlike, at key moments, rereading a novel featuring an unreliable narrator, so as to identify the places where vital information has been withheld.
True, the Vaz inquiry is not exactly Villette, nor even Gone Girl, but what went through Vaz’s head when Chuka Umunna speculated about “often everyday guys who just do this because they think they can get away with it and can exploit women”? Alas, buyer-witnesses were thin on the ground. “What about that guy who is in a stable, happy situation and has children?” Umunna asked ACC Holland. “That person really often gets away scot-free.”
If Vaz’s interim report is not dismissed as fatally compromised, family guy now buys sex with the official blessing of the home affairs committee. Sceptical of most research, it is airy about trafficking, artful in describing rights-based arguments as quaintly “moral” and wilfully obtuse about the power imbalance between sex buyers and sellers. In what, on the evidence of his hearings, may well be the authentic voice of Vaz, it denies any connection between sexual exploitation and “prostitution between consenting adults”. Maybe that’s his way of declaring an interest.
• Comments will be opened later

