13:14

What’s increasingly struck me about Brexit is how incredibly complex it is. Every time I look to research into a new bit of British life to see what the implications are, my mind starts to boggle. Take passports, for example. It seems like bringing back a navy blue passport will be a PR win for Theresa May, would please a lot of Leave voters, and be a real symbol of “taking back control”.

So, first of all you’ve got to make sure that the rest of the EU and the rest of the world will continue to accept UK passports issued with the European Union design and name on them after the actual day of Brexit. I can’t imagine they would be refused, but you’d probably need to explicitly clarify they would still be valid. There will be people whose passports expire a few days before the date of Brexit who will need to renew them for travel in that period, so you also have to decide whether you are going to continue issuing passports in the EU design that expire in 10 years, or whether you gradually taper this down.

Passports: a sticking point? Photograph: Niklas Halle'N/AFP/Getty Images

If you’ve got 10 year EU-style passports being issued that means you have to commit to all the equipment at our borders still being able to read the data on those passports for at least a decade. That probably means whatever you do about the new passport design, the chips etc have got to be compatible with the existing equipment. So even though we’ve taken back control, we’d still have to adhere to the EU data standard. You can anticipate that there will be a rush of people wanting to replace their passports early, so before you start issuing them you need to have stockpiled enough of the new design and make sure there isn’t going to be a huge overwhelming backlog of applications.

None of this is insurmountable, it is quite clearly possible to switch from one set of passport designs to a different set on a specific day, because we did it in reverse. But, what you’ve got to do is synchronise this change with all the other changes you are making. And you’ve got to find the civil service and ministerial time for it, with a civil service that has been reduced in size over the last six years. Possibly it would require some legislation which might take up a bit of parliamentary time. And it is the least of your worries, but you probably also have to remember to change all the signs at every single border crossing. And changing passports is just ONE element in the whole of Brexit. It’s all achievable, but I genuinely expect to be reporting on the process of Brexit for the next five years.