All political parties contain contradictions, but few are as confused about their purpose as Ukip. The party was founded in opposition to European integration and evolved into a less coherent nationalistic protest movement. On that journey, hostility towards “Brussels” has served as a sanitising agent, lending mainstream propriety to an organisation in which anxiety about a loss of identity sometimes merges with outright racism. The adhesive quality of Euroscepticism is weaker now that Britain has a prime minister committed to Brexit. It is far from clear that Diane James, Ukip’s new leader, is capable of restoring the insurgent energy that gave the party such momentum in the pre-referendum years.

Ukip elects Diane James as new party leader Read more

Ms James ran a cautious campaign, eschewing policy and avoiding debate. In presentational terms she was the slickest candidate; she appealed to members who want a more professional organisation. Nigel Farage shared but never achieved that objective, partly because of his narcissistic character and partly because of the nature of the movement he had built. Beyond the European question, there is a tension in Ukip between an ambition to be respectable and a wilful embrace of maverick identity that rejects “establishment” notions of respectability. This problem was encapsulated in Mr Farage’s problematic relationship with parliament, denouncing it as a den of corruption while desperately trying to win a seat there. The Faragist platform resonated widely enough to give Ukip a double-digit share of the national vote without ever electing him an MP.

That is a technical obstacle of the Westminster voting system, but it expresses also Mr Farage’s failure to reassure mainstream voters that his claims to abhor racism were sincere. Ukip’s only MP, Douglas Carswell, first won his seat when badged as a Tory, and he espouses an internationalist libertarianism that can share a tent with Ukip’s anti-immigration, nativist tendency only if both sides agree to pretend they are compatible. That pretence is breaking down. Mr Carswell would look more at home rejoining the Conservatives. He is not alone. Alexandra Phillips, Ukip’s former head of media, told the Guardian today that she has joined the Tories and claimed that tens of thousands of Ukip members had done the same. Mrs May’s commitment to Brexit, grammar schools and immigration control appear to have made her party once again a natural home for those who defected to Ukip in horror at David Cameron’s dalliances with more liberal conservatism.

Even before the Brexit vote, Mr Farage said that his party had reached the limits of growth available by recruiting disgruntled Tories. He envisaged future advances being made in Labour seats in the Midlands, the north of England and Wales. Many Labour MPs, witnessing the receptivity of their core voters to anti-EU messages during the referendum campaign, fear a challenge from Ukip could trigger a collapse of their heartland support. Ms James inherits an organisational shambles where the leading figures hate one another. Her first move was to stop the party’s leader in Wales, the ex-Tory MP Neil Hamilton, from addressing conference. She has the notional support of Mr Farage, but only after his first-choice candidate, immigration spokesman Steven Woolfe, was excluded from the ballot on technical grounds that supporters believe were trumped up and motivated by factional spite. The outgoing leader may not relinquish the limelight to which he has become so obviously addicted.

Anyone who judges Ukip’s influence in British politics to have been pernicious – laundering xenophobia with the ideological detergent of Euroscepticism – may enjoy seeing it consumed by factional bickering. But institutional malaise must not be confused with abeyance of the force Ukip represented. Brexit cannot satisfy many of those who voted to leave the EU because EU membership was not the root of their dissatisfaction. The drivers of Faragism – economic insecurity and disorientation connected to the pace of globalisation – will remain. The capacity of Mrs May’s government to address them while bogged down in complex European negotiations, will be limited. A period of Ukip disarray still creates an opportunity for the Tories and Labour to reconnect with disillusioned supporters who have been lending protest votes to Ukip. That will not be easy, but the moment must be seized quickly. It may not last long.