
The world moves on. Ducking stools don’t actually work all that well. Children have nimble little fingers and fit easily up chimneys but they’ve been more or less successfully rebranded: we generally try not to kill or maim them these days – unless they’re foreign, of course. And we have given up inflicting our imperialist ambitions on unwitting nations.
The days of waltzing into some country and saddling its mountains and lakes with the names of faceless bureaucrats – or surveyors from Crickhowell, in the case of George Everest – have gone. Now, it turns out, we waltz into countries and saddle them with the names of luxury watches.
Or so it was recently announced. A team of British climbers had “conquered” a previously unclimbed peak in Kyrgyzstan in an “exhilarating expedition”. And they had named it after their sponsor. Welcome, world, to “Mount Trident” – so-called “after British watch brand Christopher Ward’s hero watch collection”.
The fact that there is already a Mount Trident – in Antarctica – and that the last notable naming of a mountain in Kyrgyzstan was Vladimir Putin Peak appears to be neither here nor there. And let us not even start on what a “hero watch collection” may or may not be. It’s not even the first mountain that the company has slapped its corporate logo on. The same team went to Tajikistan in 2013 and achieved a first ascent of what is now “Mount Christopher Ward”.
But maybe the surprising thing is not that there is nothing in the world left that a company won’t try and commercialise, it’s that others haven’t yet jumped on the same bandwagon. Kyrgyzstan alone has dozens of unclimbed peaks all just sitting there waiting for their corporate branding. Where is Mount Sports Direct? Peak Primark? When oh when will we have Mount Poundworld?
Good luck to the climbers. A nice bunch of intrepid young men, by all accounts, who just want to climb mountains. But at what cost? These are some of the most remote and beautiful places left on Earth. A true wilderness where few people have ever been, named now and for ever more as an advert for a £730 watch. It’s one things to name your mountains after surveyors and strongman presidents, but to turn them into commercials for overpriced consumer goods is surely in another category.
Mountains have always reflected our own world back at us: our imperial ambitions, our national pride, our xenophobic tendencies. The “conquering” of Everest by a British expedition is widely seen as the crowning moment of the age of empire: the news reached England on the morning of Queen Elizabeth II’s coronation. But now it’s just money. Our mountains are us: venal, commercial, exploited for profit. The natural world is there for the picking, to be commercialised and commodified and then sold back to us. Adventures have to be Instagramable, experiences must look good on Facebook. Wilderness is there to be “conquered”.
It’s possible I’m just upset because Theresa May has taken my favourite pastime – walking up hills – and turned it Tory. It was bad enough when Boris and Cameron made a Conservative landgrab for cycling. But you can go outdoors without a pair of telescopic walking poles, a sensible polo shirt and a desire to exit the European Union, you really can. Let Mount Trident inspire you to not buy a £730 watch. To not buy anything – even telescopic walking poles. It’s perfectly possible to go for a hike without dressing like a German lady trucker – though I generally do – but it’s a wonderful world out there, whatever.
Now say sorry like you mean it, Ryan








  

US swimmer Ryan Lochte after the men’s 4x200-metre freestyle heat in Rio. Photograph: Michael Sohn/AP


And so, congratulations, Ryan Lochte for this year’s masterclass in How to Apologise Like a Dick. Hot on the heels of Donald Trump’s announcement last week of an unprecedented, heartfelt and entirely non-specific “regret” comes the American gold medal-winning swimmer’s incursion into the burgeoning field of the celebrity non-apology.
Previous practitioners of the genre include Gary Barlow, who prefaced news of a new Take That album with an apology to “anyone who was offended by the tax stories earlier this year”. Because, yes, it was the stories that offended one so, not the £20m band members paid back to HMRC this year.
And now: “The Lochte”, aka an apology so unapologetic that it slips in an entirely new accusation, in this case against the host city of the games at which you’ve just won gold. The 12-time Olympic medallist had earlier told the world he’d been robbed at gunpoint, a story that had the unfortunate qualities of being a) untrue and b) a cover story for the fact that he was pissed.
For which Lochte apologised. Or, more specifically, he apologised for “not being more careful and candid in how I described the events”. And also for the “traumatic” experience of having “a stranger point a gun and demand money”. Or as an eyewitness, Fernando Deluz, told the New York Times, when a security guard stopped him after he tried to escape.
No word as yet from his sponsors – Speedo, Airweave and Ralph Lauren. A word of advice, Ryan: you may want to hold off on the use of the word “traumatic” just a little while longer.
The Olympics are just for youngsters? I don’t think so








  

Team GB’s Olympic showjumping gold medallist Nick Skelton. Photograph: Pilar Olivares/Reuters


Thank you, Olympic showjumper Nick Skelton for giving hope to middle-aged wearers of Lycra everywhere. It’s still possible, people!
Skelton’s blond hair may be turning a touch silvery, and in 2011, he had a hip-replacement operation, but last week he showed us what’s possible when, at the age of 58, he became Britain’s oldest gold medal winner since 61-year-old Joshua Milner triumphed at shooting in 1908.
Because, yes, you too can dare to dream. Consider Oscar Swahn, a Swede, who competed up to the age of 72 complete with tweed jacket and a Father Christmas beard. And then there’s Santiago Lange, a 54-year-old Argentinian who won a gold in the sailing this year - minus part of his left lung, removed after treatment for cancer.
All you need is grit, determination, a big horse and perhaps 40 years of experience: Skelton entered his first competition in 1975. Onwards!

