The Democratic National Convention has opened in Philadelphia to a backdrop of intra-party mayhem. Leaked emails released by WikiLeaks show that prominent Democratic Party officials worked covertly to discredit Bernie Sanders, the socialist candidate in the presidential primaries. This would be in contravention of the party’s own rules and the revelation has caused considerable havoc after Democratic National Committee chairwoman Debbie Wasserman Schultz stood down.

Here in the UK last week Len McCluskey, the general secretary of Unite – Britain’s biggest union – suggested that the domestic security agency MI5 could be using smear tactics against the Labour party leader Jeremy Corbyn.

To many of us this sounds like a fanciful conspiracy theory. Why would a democratic country that cherishes free and open elections, freedom of expression and political pluralism engage in such “dark arts” to damage the reputation of a political leader? The problem with conspiracy theories is that they can detract from more visible and everyday injustices. But that does not mean that some of them aren’t true.

In fact, the recent history of governments and corporations engaging with their opposition is full of examples of infiltration, informants, agent provocateurs and other covert tactics. Often they are aimed at discrediting progressive movements and socialist organisations.

In the most extreme cases covert operations against political opponents have led to the overthrow of democratically elected governments. In the 1973 coup d’état in Chile, the socialist president Salvador Allende was deposed by the country’s armed forces and later replaced by the dictator Augusto Pinochet. The extensive campaign by the US intelligence agency CIA to destabilise Allende’s Popular Unity government was key to the plot. The Church Committee of the US Senate later laid bare a number of covert programmes by the CIA implicating the agency in attempts to assassinate foreign leaders and to undermine foreign governments.

But covert operations have also been aimed at political dissidents at home. Most notoriously the FBI’s counter intelligence programme, known as Cointelpro, was designed to disrupt the influence of US communists. It was then extended to neutralise left-wing as well as extreme right movements, including the Black Panther Party and anti-Vietnam war protesters. Cointelpro was not an operation of foreign espionage but targeted and monitored American citizens.

In 1985 the French intelligence services planted bombs on the Greenpeace ship Rainbow Warrior on its way to protest French nuclear weapons testing in the Pacific Ocean. Two explosions sank the ship in a New Zealand harbour and killed the photographer Fernando Pereira. But rather than weakening the opposition to nuclear tests, it galvanised the movement.

Today we know very little about the involvement of security services in tracking political activists. But recent exposures in Germany and Britain indicate that it is the police who are engaged in a kind of domestic espionage of their own.

McDonnell: Corbyn would resign if defeated in a general election

In Britain, activists discovered that several undercover police officers had been living amongst them for years and reporting back to the authorities. What has been dubbed the “spycops” scandal involves secretive Special Branch units that sent undercover police to infiltrate and build long-term personal relationships with political campaigners in diverse protest movements.

In 1968, the Special Demonstration Squad was set up following anti-Vietnam war protests outside London’s US embassy that descended into clashes with the police. The aim was to provide intelligence for public order control by going “deep undercover” within anti-war, labour and environmental movements.

And these weren’t the only targets. Undercovers were allegedly involved in attempting to monitor the justice campaign run by Doreen Lawrence, the mother of Stephen Lawrence who was murdered in a racist attack in 1993.

The blacklisting scandal involved major construction companies paying for information collected by private investigators on the activities and personal details of trade union activists.

And the police whistle-blower Peter Francis has gone on record stating that undercover police units collected information on elected representatives during the 1990s. Among them are Jeremy Corbyn and the former London mayor Ken Livingstone.

The most ridiculous claims made about Jeremy Corbyn







11 show all The most ridiculous claims made about Jeremy Corbyn



















1/11 He called Hezbollah and Hamas ‘friends’ True. In a speech made to the Stop the War Coalition in 2009, Mr Corbyn called representatives from both groups “friends” after inviting them to Parliament. He later told Channel 4 he wanted both groups, who have factions designated as international terror organisations, to be “part of the debate” for the Middle East peace process. “I use (the word ‘friends’) in a collective way, saying our friends are prepared to talk,” he added. “Does it mean I agree with Hamas and what it does? No. Does it mean I agree with Hezbollah and what they do? No.” Reuters

2/11 ‘Jeremy Corbyn thinks the death of Osama bin Laden was a tragedy’ Partly false. David Cameron used this as a line of attack at the Conservative Party conference but appears to have left out all context from Mr Corbyn’s original remarks. In an 2011 interview on Iranian television, the then-backbencher said the fact the al-Qaeda leader was not put on trial was the tragedy, continuing: “The World Trade Center was a tragedy, the attack on Afghanistan was a tragedy, the war in Iraq was a tragedy.”

3/11 He is ‘haunted’ by the legacy of his ‘evil’ great-great-grandfather False. A Daily Express exposé revealed that the Labour leader’s ancestor, James Sargent, was the “despotic” master of a Victorian workhouse. Addressing the report at the Labour conference, Mr Corbyn said he had never heard of him before, adding: “I want to take this opportunity to apologise for not doing the decent thing and going back in time and having a chat with him about his appalling behaviour.”

4/11 Jeremy Corbyn raised a motion about ‘pigeon bombs’ in Parliament This one is true. On 21 May 2004, Mr Corbyn raised an early day motion entitled “pigeon bombs”, proposing that the House register being “appalled but barely surprised” that MI5 reportedly proposed to load pigeons with explosives as a weapon. The motion continued: “The House… believes that humans represent the most obscene, perverted, cruel, uncivilised and lethal species ever to inhabit the planet and looks forward to the day when the inevitable asteroid slams into the earth and wipes them out thus giving nature the opportunity to start again.” It was not carried.

5/11 He rides a Communist bicycle False. A report in The Times referred to Mr Corbyn, known for his cycling, riding a “Chairman Mao-style bicycle” earlier this year. “Less thorough journalists might have referred to it as just a bicycle, but no, so we have to conclude that whenever we see somebody on a bicycle from now on, there goes another supporter of Chairman Mao,” he later joked.

6/11 'Jeremy Corbyn will appoint a special minister for Jews' False so far. The Sun report in December was allegedly based on a “rumour” passed to the paper by a Daily Express columnist who has written pieces critical of the Labour leader in the past. The minister did not materialise in his shadow cabinet.

7/11 ‘Jeremy Corbyn wishes Britain would abolish its Army’ False. Another gem from The Sun took comments made at a Hiroshima remembrance parade in August 2012 where Mr Corbyn supported Costa Rica’s move to abolish it armed forces. “Wouldn’t it be wonderful if every politician around the world…abolished the army and took pride in the fact that they don’t have an army,” he added. The caveat that “every politician” must take the step suggests Mr Corbyn does not support UK disarmament just yet.

8/11 Jeremy Corbyn stole sandwiches meant for veterans False. The Guido Fawkes blog claimed that the Labour leader took sandwiches meant for veterans at at Battle of Britain memorial service in September but a photo later emerged showing him being handed one by Costa volunteers, who later confirmed they were given to all guests.

9/11 He missed the induction into the Queen’s privy council True. After much speculation about Mr Corbyn’s republican views and willingness to bow to the monarch, his office confirmed that he did not attend the official induction to the privy council because of a prior engagement, but did not rule out joining the body.

10/11 Jeremy Corbyn refuses to sing the national anthem. Partly true. The Labour leader was filmed standing in silence as God Save the Queen was sung at a Battle of Britain remembrance service but will reportedly sing it in future. Mr Corbyn was elusive on the issue in an interview, saying he would show memorials “respect in the proper way”, but sources said he would sing the anthem at future occasions.

11/11 He is a member of the All-Party Parliamentary Group for Cheese True. The group lists its purpose as the following: “To increase awareness of issues surrounding the dairy industry and focus on economic issues affecting the dairy industry and producers.”

Those covert surveillance tactics are now subject to a public inquiry chaired by a senior judge. No doubt the most toxic accusations thrown at the police involve the immoral and probably unlawful behaviour of some, if not all, of the officers.

Most of the outed undercover agents were men who deceived female activists into intimate and sexual relationships. In a particularly shocking case, one officer even fathered a child with the woman he was sent to spy on. The spycops also assumed the identity of dead children without their parents’ knowledge and withheld evidence in court cases.

None of this should make us any less sceptical about conspiracy theories. But where evidence of foul play by the intelligence and police services exists, it should be taken seriously.

Raphael Schlembach is a lecturer in criminology at the University of Brighton