For the past six months I have dedicated myself to a project aimed at breaking apart the endemic discrimination, prejudice, and, frankly, boredom that characterises so much of mainstream political life. The Momentum office in London deals with the organisation’s admin, press, events and community organising – and it could not be more different to the archetype of a political office. It is run by a diverse range of hard-working, dedicated volunteers and three paid members of staff. Their average age cannot be more than 22.

Momentum, locally and nationally, tries to reach out to people. Across the country people are putting on concerts for Corbyn, poetry readings, coffee mornings. Mothers and fathers are meeting to discuss politics at play centres. People are organising football matches that are followed by discussions on the north-south divide or sexism and racism within football. Local people are organising to protect their local libraries and hospitals from Tory cuts.

In the office, we try to create an environment that reflects that new politics. However stressful and difficult things get, the office is a safe, happy and creative place. As a young woman of 19, I am respected: I can express my thoughts, debate my values, act on my ideas. We hold women’s brunches to support each other and nobody minds when I dance in the staff room when I get too stressed. The office is open to anyone – we don’t mind who you are, as long as you want to help. The Momentum office isn’t perfect (what office is?) but we do our best to make it inclusive, loving, participatory and diverse.

It isn’t supposed to be this way – as I learned when I came face to face with Caroline Flint MP on Radio 4’s Woman’s Hour last week. I wanted to talk about how the culture of the Labour Party stifles women’s voices, how the gender pay gap is widening, how new junior doctors’ contracts and cuts to nurses’ bursaries disproportionality effect women, and how cuts to women’s refuges mean that women in danger are being turned away in their hour of need. And I wanted to argue that Jeremy Corbyn’s policies of ending austerity, universal childcare, and investment in public services will help women.

Caroline Flint didn’t. She berated me, not only during the programme but before and after we were on air. She told me that my movement was violent, and that, as a woman, I should not be a part of group whose members abuse and threaten women MPs. She looked at me, a young activist, and simply saw a proxy for the trolls – none of them, as far as we know, Momentum members – who send death threats on Twitter.

The most ridiculous claims made about Jeremy Corbyn







11 show all The most ridiculous claims made about Jeremy Corbyn



















1/11 He called Hezbollah and Hamas ‘friends’ True. In a speech made to the Stop the War Coalition in 2009, Mr Corbyn called representatives from both groups “friends” after inviting them to Parliament. He later told Channel 4 he wanted both groups, who have factions designated as international terror organisations, to be “part of the debate” for the Middle East peace process. “I use (the word ‘friends’) in a collective way, saying our friends are prepared to talk,” he added. “Does it mean I agree with Hamas and what it does? No. Does it mean I agree with Hezbollah and what they do? No.” Reuters

2/11 ‘Jeremy Corbyn thinks the death of Osama bin Laden was a tragedy’ Partly false. David Cameron used this as a line of attack at the Conservative Party conference but appears to have left out all context from Mr Corbyn’s original remarks. In an 2011 interview on Iranian television, the then-backbencher said the fact the al-Qaeda leader was not put on trial was the tragedy, continuing: “The World Trade Center was a tragedy, the attack on Afghanistan was a tragedy, the war in Iraq was a tragedy.”

3/11 He is ‘haunted’ by the legacy of his ‘evil’ great-great-grandfather False. A Daily Express exposé revealed that the Labour leader’s ancestor, James Sargent, was the “despotic” master of a Victorian workhouse. Addressing the report at the Labour conference, Mr Corbyn said he had never heard of him before, adding: “I want to take this opportunity to apologise for not doing the decent thing and going back in time and having a chat with him about his appalling behaviour.”

4/11 Jeremy Corbyn raised a motion about ‘pigeon bombs’ in Parliament This one is true. On 21 May 2004, Mr Corbyn raised an early day motion entitled “pigeon bombs”, proposing that the House register being “appalled but barely surprised” that MI5 reportedly proposed to load pigeons with explosives as a weapon. The motion continued: “The House… believes that humans represent the most obscene, perverted, cruel, uncivilised and lethal species ever to inhabit the planet and looks forward to the day when the inevitable asteroid slams into the earth and wipes them out thus giving nature the opportunity to start again.” It was not carried.

5/11 He rides a Communist bicycle False. A report in The Times referred to Mr Corbyn, known for his cycling, riding a “Chairman Mao-style bicycle” earlier this year. “Less thorough journalists might have referred to it as just a bicycle, but no, so we have to conclude that whenever we see somebody on a bicycle from now on, there goes another supporter of Chairman Mao,” he later joked.

6/11 'Jeremy Corbyn will appoint a special minister for Jews' False so far. The Sun report in December was allegedly based on a “rumour” passed to the paper by a Daily Express columnist who has written pieces critical of the Labour leader in the past. The minister did not materialise in his shadow cabinet.

7/11 ‘Jeremy Corbyn wishes Britain would abolish its Army’ False. Another gem from The Sun took comments made at a Hiroshima remembrance parade in August 2012 where Mr Corbyn supported Costa Rica’s move to abolish it armed forces. “Wouldn’t it be wonderful if every politician around the world…abolished the army and took pride in the fact that they don’t have an army,” he added. The caveat that “every politician” must take the step suggests Mr Corbyn does not support UK disarmament just yet.

8/11 Jeremy Corbyn stole sandwiches meant for veterans False. The Guido Fawkes blog claimed that the Labour leader took sandwiches meant for veterans at at Battle of Britain memorial service in September but a photo later emerged showing him being handed one by Costa volunteers, who later confirmed they were given to all guests.

9/11 He missed the induction into the Queen’s privy council True. After much speculation about Mr Corbyn’s republican views and willingness to bow to the monarch, his office confirmed that he did not attend the official induction to the privy council because of a prior engagement, but did not rule out joining the body.

10/11 Jeremy Corbyn refuses to sing the national anthem. Partly true. The Labour leader was filmed standing in silence as God Save the Queen was sung at a Battle of Britain remembrance service but will reportedly sing it in future. Mr Corbyn was elusive on the issue in an interview, saying he would show memorials “respect in the proper way”, but sources said he would sing the anthem at future occasions.

11/11 He is a member of the All-Party Parliamentary Group for Cheese True. The group lists its purpose as the following: “To increase awareness of issues surrounding the dairy industry and focus on economic issues affecting the dairy industry and producers.”

That attitude tells you two things about the people who are so keen to unseat Corbyn and declare that his supporters are unanimously sexist. Firstly, they are utterly focused on a narrow narrative around the bullying of MPs by activists – and they are determined to use it, and the gendered aspect of it, to pursue a vendetta against Jeremy Corbyn and his supporters. Secondly, when it comes to the real environment for young women in Labour, their protests against bullying only go so far. If they know you’re in Momentum, berating you, deliberately misunderstanding your beliefs and denying you time to speak is just fine.

Last week, Caroline Flint endorsed Owen Smith for the Labour leadership. I don’t blame Owen Smith for Flint’s patronising treatment of me, any more than it would be reasonable to blame him for the numerous death threats directed at Jeremy Corbyn, or to blame Jeremy Corbyn for death threats against Labour MPs. Like mass movements, parliamentary parties are difficult to control. Hundreds of thousands (or in the PLP’s case, hundreds) of people are engaging in politics – and many are hurt and angry about the way they have been treated by society. Some resort to shouting people down, to being disingenuous, or to threats and abuse – and all that has to be tackled.

Owen Smith says Jeremy Corbyn would have a place in his Shadow Cabinet

On the other hand, I do blame Owen Smith for that time he told Leanne Wood that she was only on Question Time because of her gender. Or that time he said, during the Coalition government, that the Lib Dems would “file for divorce as soon as the bruises start to show through the makeup”. Or his use of violent, gendered “political rhetoric” last week about “smashing” Theresa May “back on her heels”.

When Corbyn’s critics try to paint Momentum as bullies, they are throwing bricks in a very fragile glass house. Their real aim, all too often, is not to tackle abuse – which, of course, we must – but to avoid a political argument about sexism which they know they are losing.