When I heard the new Prime Minister Theresa May speak on television yesterday, I thought to myself that maybe, just maybe the UK was in a safe pair of hands after the Brexit vote.

A few hours hadn’t even passed before I’d completely changed my mind. Genuinely, I cannot believe that our new PM has appointed Boris Johnson as Foreign Secretary, Britain’s chief diplomat. Johnson, a man perhaps best known for his racist and xenophobic “gaffes”, will now be representing UK interests abroad to some of the most powerful foreign dignitaries in the world – including US President Barack Obama, who he recently suggested had an “ancestral dislike” of Britain which guided his opposition to Brexit, being “part Kenyan” and all.

Boris Johnson is now someone who will have to deal directly with the Commonwealth, an area where predominantly non-white people live. And alongside Secretary of State for Exiting the EU David Davis, he will presumably have negotiations with the rest of those European bureaucrats he so despises to attend.

Put simply, Theresa May has totally undermined Britain's international presence and status, and made us a global laughingstock. It’s an embarrassing decision of epic proportions. Boris Johnson has gone from being bad for our country to being bad for the world.

Theresa May's first speech as PM

I write often about my differences as a modern day Briton, because I am proud of them. My diversity as a mixed-race gay man from Liverpool of black and Irish heritage is meant to be all that is good about a forward-looking UK. Yet Boris Johnson has been disparaging about all that I am, and he’s often rewarded for it.

He has had to apologise for referring to black people as "piccaninnies" with "watermelon smiles" in the past. He has also had to say sorry for commenting that black people have lower IQs, and suggested that same-sex marriage “could lead to three men and a dog getting married”. He referred to London’s St Patrick’s Day event as “lefty Sinn Fein crap”, was the editor of a magazine whose editorial stated that people from Liverpool want to “wallow” in their “victim status” because of their “deeply unattractive psyche”, and said of Hillary Clinton, the likely next President of the United States: “She’s got dyed blonde hair and pouty lips, and a steely blue stare, like a sadistic nurse in a mental hospital”.

I could go on, but I think you get the point.

So I'm dismayed that the new PM, who in her first speech banged on about One Nation, social justice and the likes, appointed such a man to a prestigious international position. I’m beyond furious, and she’s lost any future vote of mine.

Theresa May's Cabinet: Who's in – and who's out?







27 show all Theresa May's Cabinet: Who's in – and who's out?



















































1/27 Andrea Leadsom Andrea Leadsom has been appointed Secretary for Secretary of State for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs Getty Images

2/27 Priti Patel Priti Patel has been appointed International Development Secretary PA

3/27 Alun Cairns Alun Cairns will stay on as Welsh Secretary Reuters

4/27 Karen Bradley Karen Bradley is now Secretary of State for Culture, Media and Sport Rex

5/27 Greg Clark Greg Clark has been appointed Secretary of State for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy PA

6/27 James Brokenshire James Brokenshire has been appointed as Secretary of State for Northern Ireland PA

7/27 Stephen Crabb Stephen Crabb has resigned as Work and Pensions Secretary PA

8/27 Theresa Villiers Theresa Villiers will not return as Northern Ireland Secretary. She was reportedly offered a role by Theresa May, but turned it down, saying it was not one she felt could take on Getty

9/27 Chris Grayling Chris Grayling has been appointed Transport Secretary PA

10/27 Damien Green Damien Green has been appointed Work and Pensions Secretary Getty

11/27 Liz Truss Liz Truss has been appointed Justice Secretary Getty Images

12/27 Patrick McLoughlin Patrick McLoughlin who was Transport Secretary has been appointed Tory Party chairman and Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster Getty Images

13/27 Justine Greening Justine Greening has been appointed as Education Secretary Getty Images

14/27 Gavin Williamson Gavin Williamson is to become the new Government Chief Whip Reuters

15/27 Jeremy Hunt Jeremy Hunt will continue as Health Secretary Getty Images

16/27 Nicky Morgan Nicky Morgan lost her job as Education Secretary Reuters

17/27 Michael Gove Michael Gove has been sacked as Justice Secretary Reuters

18/27 John Whittingdale John Whittingdale left his job as Culture Secretary EPA

19/27 Oliver Letwin Oliver Letwin, the Chancellor for the Duchy of Lancaster, has been sacked from his role in the cabinet PA

20/27 Philip Hammond The former Foreign Secretary has been made Chancellor EPA

21/27 Boris Johnson Leading Brexit campaigner is given the role of Foreign Secretary Getty

22/27 Amber Rudd Leading Remain campaigner takes Theresa May's old job of Home Secretary PA

23/27 Michael Fallon Stays as Defence Secretary AP

24/27 Liam Fox The former Defence Secretary is named as head of new Department for International Trade PA

25/27 David Davis The former shadow Home Secretary and leadership rival to David Cameron is named Secretary of State for Leaving the European Union - aka Brexit minister PA

26/27 George Osborne Gone as Chancellor - and fails to secure any new role in May's government GETTY

27/27 David Mundell The Conservative Party's only Scottish MP retains his role as Scottish Secretary Getty Images

I watched last night as the US State Department spokesperson could hardly contain his laughter when he heard Johnson was our new Foreign Secretary. To some Britons this might all seem brilliant, and like we’ve taken our country back - but to where, the Middle Ages? Do we really want to be known as Little Britain around the world? Do we want these backward views to define us and do we want Boris Johnson to speak for us?

I’ve heard some people say it is a shrewd move by May, an attempt to keep her enemies closer than her friends. But our international image and future of our country isn’t – and shouldn’t be – a political game.

Johnson has been rewarded for Brexit, yes, and dividing a nation and its people. Now he’s set to divide us from every other country as well.