From my time in the Islamist organisation Al-Muhajiroun (now banned and referred to as “Isis UK”), I know how radicalisation works – I used to do it. I would target people, just like I was targeted, and then use a deadly combination of local grievances and rehearsed narratives to lure them deeper into a complex, insular and disturbing world. At one point, I found myself in conversations with members about how we would bomb the London Underground. It was terrible. I was concerned about my operational capability, not about the death or the misery I would inflict. This is what extremism does to you.

When I first encountered this organisation, its Islamist narrative quickly gave me a sense of purpose into which I could fuel my personal and societal grievances. Extremism is an exploitative process; religious, not religious, political or apolitical, it will find a way to give you clarity amid complexity. The feeling is powerful and all-encompassing.

The Nice killer, Mohamed Lahouaiej Bouhlel, is a classic case of rapid radicalisation, where an unstable life was given purpose by the clarity of Islamism. To stop future attacks, we must focus on the ingredients of the radicalisation cocktail rather than its end product.

Mohamed Lahouaiej Bouhlel was reportedly a sporty womaniser who enjoyed salsa and drinking, and he was radicalised within a matter of weeks or even days. He was unknown to intelligence services and picked both his weapon and his targets at random. The process of radicalisation is getting shorter and the choice of soft targets and weapons is becoming more unpredictable. We have entered a new era of terrorism. As President Hollande termed it, the “terrorism of opportunity” is on the rise and we are likely to see more attacks of this kind. The shift away from centralised planning of attacks towards operational independence demands a nuanced counter-strategy beyond extreme state security measures.

French security forces are already stretched to the limit and have been operating around the clock across the entire country. But focusing on intelligence and sharp-end security will not do the job. It is neither feasible nor desirable to monitor all individuals at risk of radicalisation or to ban individuals from renting a lorry. However, this doesn’t mean we’re powerless – we just need a change in strategy.

People must understand that Islam is not the problem; extremism is. As Bouhlel’s example shows, it is in fact often the least devout individuals who become Islamist extremists. In Al-Muhajiroun, the narrative I absorbed was a skewed interpretation of Islam that taught me to de-humanise non-Muslims. They taught me that to question their ideology would be to question God.

The victims of the Nice attack

Islam is not an inherently violent faith, but it has been exploited by extremists who have twisted the verses to suit their political goals. Muslims need to confront these extremist interpretations and reclaim Islam. We need our own enlightenment.

Initiatives from within Muslim communities such as the #MyIslam campaign are crucial to creating a sense of belonging for individuals who feel forgotten or excluded in our fast-moving world. Only by offering strong alternatives to the Islamist extremist interpretations of the Qu’ran will we win back the hearts and minds of vulnerable individuals. In more tactical terms, we need a complete saturation of the information sphere with counter-messaging and alternative interpretations. Only then can we stop opportunistic, low-grade terror attacks.

To starve Isis of its emotional appeal, our response needs to show more commitment to and confidence in the enlightenment values of liberty, equality and fraternity that were under attack on Bastille Day. Otherwise, extremists will watch gleefully as we cripple our human rights policies and cut down civic liberties.

In pictures: Bastille Day Nice attack







30 show all In pictures: Bastille Day Nice attack

























































1/30 A man reacts near bouquets of flowers near the scene where a truck ran into a crowd at high speed killing scores and injuring more who were celebrating the Bastille Day national holiday in Nice Reuters

2/30 A woman arrives with a toy and a bouquet of flowers as people pay tribute near the scene where a truck ran into a crowd in Nice Reuters

3/30 A woman reacts as she places flowers in front of the memorial set on the 'Promenade des Anglais' where the truck crashed into the crowd during the Bastille Day celebrations in Nice EPA

4/30 People gather to view the floral tributes near the site of the truck attack in the French resort city of Nice AP

5/30 A man reacts near bouquets of flowers as people pay tribute near the scene where a truck ran into a crowd at high speed killing scores and injuring more who were celebrating the Bastille Day national holiday, in Nice Reuters

6/30 Floral tributes are laid out near the site of the truck attack in the French resort city of Nice AP

7/30 A child's toy is placed among the floral tributes laid out near the site of the truck attack in the French resort city of Nice AP

8/30 Investigators continue at the scene near the heavy truck that ran into a crowd at high speed killing scores who were celebrating the Bastille Day in Nice Reuters

9/30 Crime scene investigators work on the 'Promenade des Anglais' after the truck crashed into the crowd during the Bastille Day celebrations in Nice EPA

10/30 A forensic expert examines dead bodies covered with a blue sheet on the Promenade des Anglais seafront in the French Riviera city of Nice Getty Images

11/30 A forensic expert evacuates a dead body on the Promenade des Anglais seafront in the French Riviera city of Nice, after a gunman smashed a truck into a crowd of revellers celebrating Bastille Day Getty Images

12/30 A man reacts as he sits near a French flag along the beachfront the day after a truck ran into a crowd at high speed killing scores celebrating the Bastille Day in Nice Reuters

13/30 Discarded items are left on the beach, not far from the site of the truck attack in the French resort city of Nice AP

14/30 Bullet holes in the windscreen of the lorry that was driven into the crowd at high speed Reuters

15/30 A man walks through debris on the street in Nice, France, the morning after a lorry ran into a crowd, killing at least 84 and injuring 50 Reuters

16/30 Rescue workers help an injured woman to get in a ambulance AFP/Getty Images

17/30 Authorities investigate a truck after it plowed through Bastille Day revelers in the French resort city of Nice, France AP

18/30 Celebrations of Bastille Day were targeted by the lorry driver AP

19/30 People cross the street with their hands on thier heads as a French soldier secures the area after at least 84 people were killed along the Promenade des Anglais in Nice Reuters

20/30 A paramedic attends one of the dozens of people injured in the Nice Bastille Day attack

21/30 Soldiers march on street where the lorry crashed into the crowd REUTERS

22/30 A man sits next to a body seen on the ground after at least 84 people were killed in Nice, when a truck ran into a crowd celebrating the Bastille Day national holiday Reuters

23/30 Bodies are seen on the ground after at least 84 people were killed in Nice, when a truck ran into a crowd celebrating the Bastille Day national holiday Reuters

24/30 Children were among the 84 killed in the atrocity, with around 50 more hospitalised Reuters

25/30 French Interior Minister Bernard Cazeneuve (2nd L) speaks to the media in Nice AFP/Getty Images

26/30 A man walks with his hands up as police officers carry out checks on people in the centre of French Riviera town of Nice AFP/Getty Images

27/30 With injured people laying in the street police and onlookers react near to a truck in Nice AP

28/30 Police officers, firefighters and rescue workers are seen at the site of the attack AFP/Getty Images

29/30 Police officers speak with a soldier after a truck that ploughed into a crowd leaving a fireworks display in the French Riviera town of Nice AFP/Getty Images

30/30 Police shine a light into the cab as they approach the driver's cab of a truck, in Nice AP

Jihadism will continue to be successful if we don’t change our approach and articulate a new vision and interpretation of Islam. Security services may not have a chance of preventing Nice-style attacks, but civil society does.

Adam Deen now works with the anti-extremism organisation Quilliam