
It was honey that she licked to break her hunger strike, the world’s longest, but it may not have tasted too sweet. Irom Sharmila had refused to put any food or water in her mouth every day for the past 16 years. Following the 2000 killing of 10 people in her home state of Manipur, reportedly by a government-run paramilitary group, Sharmila was calling for the repressive Armed Forces Special Powers Act (AFSPA), which grants the military immunity from judicial inquiry, to be repealed. Repeatedly arrested, released and rearrested on the charge of attempted suicide in a farcical routine during her protest, Sharmila had been incarcerated in a hospital room and was being force-fed through a surgical nasal tube.
But when the “iron lady of Manipur” announced she would eat and drink again, it made many well-fed people very uncomfortable. Tragically, some of her closest supporters failed to welcome her decision to end the hunger strike and enter politics instead. But why should the legitimacy of Sharmila’s battle only depend on her willingness to be cast in the martyr mould? There is something deeply selfish and illogical in expecting an absolute personal sacrifice from her.








  

Irom Sharmila at a press conference in Imphal. Photograph: Anupam Nath/AP


While the draconian law was not repealed, her hunger strike did lay bare the apathy in India both for this form of protest and for the violence the law has fuelled. Many of us who grew up in parts of India far from the north-east, and with a national media that loves to ignore the region, got to know of the AFSPA because we had heard Sharmila’s story. And it has drawn attention to the law globally too. Sharmila has accomplished what no one else could, by giving a face to the protest, and a compassionate one at that.
Her fast was an act of silent resistance. But she has spoken now. She would like to become chief minister of Manipur; if elected, she wants to repeal the AFSPA. Everyone knows this won’t be easy but her fast wasn’t either. State elections are due early next year. Sharmila has just about enough time to make the transition from being a peaceful protester to an active politician. By her own admission this is new terrain and no one knows whether she will succeed.




 

Sharmila’s change of strategy is courageous




 

To make matters worse, the misogyny among her supporters and observers, who are pitting her personal choices against her political stance, is doing her a great disservice. Her relationship with the British-Indian man she’d like to marry has irked many who believe he might have “misled” her into taking this decision. This kind of scrutiny takes away agency from Sharmila, who is known to have taken the decision to go on this long hunger strike on her own.
Furthermore, two insurgent groups have allegedly sent Sharmila warnings, reminding her that those like her who “forgot” what they were fighting for have been assassinated in the past. But Sharmila told journalists after she broke her fast that she wants to be seen as “a human being with feelings” and not a “goddess”. Her life is threatened in a more serious way today than it ever was before. And her new political choice is just as big a gamble as the last.




Indian activist ends 16-year hunger strike with a lick of honey




Sharmila’s change of strategy is courageous. She has resisted the narcissist trap of wanting to be respected and remembered for living and dying for a single oath. Rather than being dismissed as a defeat, her decision should be seen as a refusal to let herself be victimised any further, as an act of renewed resistance. During the hunger strike, she was allowed neither to die nor to live fully and her protest fell on deaf ears. She was reduced to being a comforting symbol for people she fought for and an innocuous creature for the Indian state, which paid no heed to her demand. Most activists fighting impunity are reluctant to do so from within the system. But watching her self-destruct in an egoistic folly would hardly help the cause.
The support structure around Sharmila has always been fragile. Her mother, who once hoped to feed her just one meal, now refuses to see her until her she succeeds in getting the AFSPA repealed. Her own supporters who thrived on her sacrifice are probably struggling right now to find their new raison d’être. They know that elections in strife-ridden Manipur are fraught with complexities. Many believe a political platform such as the one Sharmila could offer, focusing primarily on the repeal of AFSPA, has no real place in Manipur politics.
But Sharmila could provide voters with a clear choice that they have not had before, as an independent candidate, not aligned with any party. She is fighting for her people and this time she won’t be alone in her struggle, as she was during her hunger strike. If people wish to empower her, the cause and themselves, they will vote for her. And if she loses, they will have to accept that they have lost too.

