
Every summer the refugee crisis is brought into sharp focus as British holidaymakers travel between Dover and Calais. The number of people crammed into the so-called Jungle refugee camp in Calais has now swelled to almost 10,000. People are outraged by shocking scenes of refugees and migrants from the camp desperately trying to get on to lorries bound for Britain.
But this year, the darker underbelly of the Calais camp has begun to surface – that of people traffickers and their trade of modern slavery, a “barbaric evil” that the prime minister Theresa May has rightly pledged to lead the way in defeating.




UK and French authorities 'blind' to growing problems in Calais camp




Last week footage emerged of a lorry stopped by a tree thrown across the approach road to the Calais docks. The camera then turned to a trafficker urging a man to clamber on board the stationary truck. Hardworking lorry drivers have had their journeys to the Port of Calais disrupted by these evil people traffickers for too long. The lengths they will go to stop lorries so migrants can get on board have become ever more extreme – as well as cutting down trees to block the route, they set fire to trucks, lob petrol bombs and threaten drivers with chainsaws and machetes. The current situation is shameful. Last week I met truckers in Calais who face these attacks daily.
For years the French and British governments have tried in vain to tackle the ever-growing problem of the Calais camps. They have built fences to keep refugees and migrants away from the docks, but the attacks on trucks now just happen further down the road. They have built containers for people to stay in – yet thousands more continue to arrive. But these attempts at ending the chaos have only worsened the symptoms. It is now time to tackle the causes of this crisis and build a better future for both Calais and Dover.




 

These ruthless gangs steal the life savings of vulnerable people and dump them in the squalor of the camp




 

Dismantling the camp will remove this magnet for refugees and migrants, conned into heading for Calais by traffickers. These ruthless gangs steal the life-savings of vulnerable people and dump them in the squalor of the camp. Some are smuggled into Britain for a future in brothels or fruit fields, where they work to pay off huge debts to the traffickers. This is modern-day slavery, pure and simple.
It is clear that we need far tougher action to tackle these traffickers. They must be caught and jailed – put behind bars for at least 20 years and have all their assets seized. We urgently require a new Dover patrol to guard the Channel and catch people traffickers on the high seas. We must also do more to protect our truckers and the vital trade they carry between Britain and France.
Some French politicians have talked about scrapping the Le Touquet treaty, which establishes British border checks at Calais. But the French know just as well as we do that maintaining this system is as much in their interest as ours. Axing the treaty altogether would be a disaster for France and Britain. It would simply force the ferries and tunnel to take the place of border guards, meaning higher ticket prices and longer queues. And enabling people to apply for UK asylum from France would be a big mistake too. It would just make Calais an even greater magnet for refugees and migrants.
Yesterday’s joint statement from the home secretary Amber Rudd and her French counterpart, Bernard Cazeneuve, is a welcome step in the right direction, with a greater focus on cracking down on people-traffickers and repatriating migrants.
Yet the swelling of numbers at the Calais camp, refugee and migrant landings on British beaches and nightly attacks on lorries underline the need for further action. I would like to see the home secretary join me in Dover and Calais to see the current situation first hand, and discuss what more can be done.
Britain is leaving the European Union, yet Brexit must not create discord. Instead it must be the start of a stronger relationship between Britain and France. This is the perfect moment to work together to deal with the causes of this crisis once and for all. Let’s restore order at the border by dismantling the Calais camp and smashing the modern-day slavery peddled by people traffickers.

