
The last few days have seen the emergence of an unlikely hero in Margrethe Vestager, the European competition commissioner. Undeterred by threats and bullying from the US Treasury she has demanded that Apple pay €13bn of back tax it has avoided thanks to a sweetheart deal with the Irish government. In spite of corporate bluster and inevitable future legal action, Vestager can act tough because her job is to ensure that there is fair competition in the European market. Quite an achievement for somebody who is in the Brexiteers’ hate group of “faceless bureaucrats”.




Tech giants know where the power lies. It’s not with us | Rafael Behr




Across the world, voters are losing faith in politicians who they accuse of not defending their wage rates or investing properly in public services. But the real cause of public disgruntlement is the draining away of power to transnational corporations who operate in a limboland beyond national borders, and the politicians who do not have the courage to stand up against the bullying of these corporations.
Apple has benefited from both a favourable Irish tax regime and the notorious “double Irish” scheme, exploiting the fact that revenues declared as earned by subsidiaries or Irish companies outside its territory are not liable to tax. This, combined with the fact that US corporations can defer paying taxes on foreign income, creates a tax incentive for multinational corporations to effectively be resident nowhere. For Apple, this meant holding $187bn outside the US in 2015, a considerable share of the total $1.2tn that US multinationals have parked offshore. If the company were to repatriate their profits in the US they would face a corporate tax rate of 35%, so they log it in Ireland and leave it offshore.
The US Treasury has been swift to attack Brussels’ attempts to ensure that a fair rate of tax is paid, getting its retaliation in first in the form of a report last week accusing the commission of acting like a “supranational tax authority”. This is a classic example of an economic rival deliberately undermining cooperation between European partners to benefit its own multinational corporations. We should celebrate the fact that the European commission is acting to protect citizens against excessive corporate power. In the global economy the real division is not between nation states but between citizens and corporations.
This is not the first time faceless Brussels bureaucrats have been sticking their noses into others’ business, namely giant corporations and the way they do business in Europe. Shortly before the referendum, the commission launched proposals on public country by country reporting (CBCR), ensuring the public disclosure of where companies do business, employ people, declare profits and pay taxes. this was all in the interests of transparency, and the need to hold corporations to account.




Apple must now pay its taxes. This is a vindication of protest | Owen Jones




Soon after the referendum, MEPs voted overwhelmingly for a series of measures including a common consolidated corporate tax base (CCCTB), a single set of rules on taxable profits for companies operating within the EU, which can stop tax wars between nations and a race to the bottom in terms of tax rates. George Osborne’s response to this post-Brexit? An announcement that he planned to reduce corporation tax to 18%. When it comes to tackling corporate tax dodging, give me faceless bureaucrats and MEPs over Tories and their corporate cronies any day.
The empty slogan “take back control” was hugely effective during the referendum campaign. I believe leave voters had a justifiable sense that we are all losing control over our work, and our public sphere. Unfortunately, with the EU, they chose the wrong target. As Vestager has proved, many of our most urgent problems can only be solved by cross-border cooperation.
No one country alone can resist the power of global corporations; to do this we need to work in cooperation with other countries. Ironically, the Brexit vote reduces our power to ensure corporations pay the taxes we need to build a thriving society and a flourishing economy. Indeed, there is a real danger that the Tories, and particularly those leading the Brexit negotiations, will seek to make the UK infamous for being one of the world’s leading tax havens.

