Yesterday, a study confirmed something that most 18 to 30-year-olds already know: we can’t buy houses. “Millennials are abandoning their dreams of home ownership,” declared a damning report that revealed home ownership in the UK has fallen to 63.8 per cent (for context, it was 70.8 per cent in 2003). But who said we had that dream in the first place?

The average UK house price is, at just over £200,000, almost 10 times the average wage, compared to just under four times the average wage at £31,000 in 1985. Salaries haven’t risen at the same rate as house prices, zero-hour contracts and unpaid internships are rife, and jobs are unstable as staffing budgets are slashed in both the public and private sector. The latest figures show that the housing crisis isn’t confined to laughably expensive London, with Manchester and the Midlands also experiencing a sharp decline in home ownership – houses may be cheaper outside the capital, but wages are often lower.

The system is actively working against millennials, and yet, the notion of “abandoning a dream” isn’t true across the board, because some of us never dreamed of home ownership in the first place.

For myself and some of my friends, owning a house seems more like a burden than an achievement. Since the post-WWII flurry of house building and buying, it’s become so ingrained in British consciousness that renting carries a stigma. But in 1918, the vast majority – 77 per cent – of households rented.

One unpleasant former acquaintance referred sneeringly to renters as “down on their luck”. But while it shouldn’t be the status quo that buying a house is only available to those with parents who can sub them a five-figure sum, or who happen to live and work in a particularly cheap area, that doesn’t mean all renters are unhappy with our situation.

Outrageous property deals in pictures







15 show all Outrageous property deals in pictures



























1/15 The Park Lane townhouse set to become one of the UK's most expensive student flats at £4,000 a week A town house situated in Park Lane, one of the most affluent places in London, is about to become the capital’s most expensive student residence. Most of London students usually live in halls of residence before moving on to house-share. For this reason it is fair to say few will able to afford the 3,540 square foot three-bedroom flat, which is available for £4,000 a week, £16,000 per month or £192,000 per year. Wetherell

2/15 London's most expensive flat goes on sale at Buckingham Palace near Buckingham Palace priced at £150m A luxury flat in London’s historic Admiralty Arch, which overlooks Buckingham Palace, could sell for up to £150 million. If sold for that price, the 15,000 sq ft apartment will become London's most expensive flat, topping One Hyde Park, a flat which sold for £140 million in 2014.The Grade I listed property boasts 12 bedrooms and 12 bathrooms

3/15 ‘Little White House’ inside the US embassy complex in London goes on sale for £2.5m A luxury home inside the US embassy complex has gone on sale for £2.5m. The property is said to be the most “protected home in Britain” and any visitor is asked to carry an identity card at all times. The complex has patrolling US marines, a 24-hour British police presence, checkpoints, anti-tanks blocks and CCTV.But potential buyers looking for a fortress should not get their hopes up as all the security will disappear once the US embassy moves to a new site in Nine Elms in 2017. The home, located at 4 Blackburne’s Mews near Grosvenor Square, dates back to 1732 and owes its nickname to its white façade, grand entrance and sweeping staircase as well as its proximity to the US embassy. It provides nearly 3,000 sq ft of living space and benefits from access to communal gardens. Wetherell

4/15 First London luxury flats to contain their own private art gallery with prices going from £3.8m up to £7.7m The first private luxury apartment building in London with its own private art gallery has been unveiled in March. The Chilterns at 24 Paddington Street contains 44 luxury residences, the majority of which were sold in 2013. It contains a signature restaurant, a 24 hour-hotel style concierge service, a gymnasium and sauna and a private cinema. The new art gallery, with original pictures of the area by David Bailey, is part of the lobby of the building and is “one of the most exciting and unique features of the Chilterns”, according to Stephen Conway, CEO of Galliard Homes. With prices going from £3.8 million up to £7.7 million for a three bedroom flat, the residence is located between the local shops of Marylebone High Street and Baker Street.

5/15 Margaret Thatcher's Belgravia home is up for sale for £30m Margaret Thatcher’s six-floor townhouse in Belgravia is on the market for a cool £30 million. The Grade II listed building on No. 73 Chester Square, one of London’s most prestigious addresses, now boasts a lift, a newly constructed mews house with a roof terrace and a private garage after a three-year refurbishment by Leconfield, a development and construction company. Some features from Thatcher’s time at the property remain. The layout and design of the formal dining room and interlinking study on the ground floor has been reinstated exactly as the Iron Lady had it during her 22 years at the property, from 1991 until her death in 2013.

6/15 Tiny London house that is just 10ft wide goes on market for £800,000 A tiny terraced house that measures no more than 10ft wide has gone on the market in south London for a staggering £800,000. The house, generally labelled "unique" by estate agent Foxtons, looks all the more unusual because it is sandwiched between two regular-sized homes. It doesn't even have a proper back door - images of the interior suggested renovators had sought to maximise the property's space by including a folding aperture to the similarly narrow back garden.

7/15 The Mayfair penthouse that sold for £30 million A Mayfair penthouse on Albemarle Street, one of Mayfair's oldest roads, sold to a mystery buyer for £30 million in December. The 5,845 sq ft, three-bedroom family home is thought to be one of the most expensive properties sold in the capital this year, and comes with an annual service charge of £61,000. supplied by Estate agent Peter Wetherell

8/15 The dilapidated pre-fab 'shed' sold for nearly £1 million A pre-fabricated bungalow in south-east London has sold at auction for just under £1 million. The 1950s property in Peckham comes with 0.6 acres of land, is in need of renovation and has no fitted bathroom, but still sold for £950,000. A guide price of £590,000 was initially set, but increased rapidly during the bidding. Google Maps

9/15 The starter home flats that went for a combined £60 million Some 215 “affordable” starter homes, specifically designed for first time buyers, sold out in just three hours in November, after dozens of aspiring homeowners camped overnight and queued in bad weather to get their hands on the flats. The starter home flats at Trinity Square by Galliard Homes went for a combined £60 million, or an average of £700 per sq ft. Londoners looking for affordable housing did not hesitate to camp out for up to two days to snag a flat, despite the fact that the project will not be complete for another two years. Galliard

10/15 The longest lateral flat where H.G wells hosted a book club: yours for £3.65m The 2,200 square foot apartment in Chiltern Court in Marylebone was also home to author Arnold Bennett and political cartoonist David Low. Now on the market for £3.65 million through Rokstone agency, the four-bedroom flat has been refurbished into a luxury apartment, providing an exceptional 40 meter window frontage and depth. It claims to be the longest and most outstanding lateral flat - ones that stretch the full width of a building, or sometimes across two buildings - currently for sale in London’s West End. Rokstone

11/15 Gatti House: the flats with celebrity links and private "pizza" lift that sold for a collective £16.5 million Celebrity links, a famous history and a private “pizza lift” has helped set a new record for price per square foot for a block of flats in central London. The four flats have sold for a collective £16.5 million at Gatti House on London’s Strand. Gatti House, a magnificent grade II building built in 1867, was sold as four separate apartments priced from £2.95 million to £5.95 million by CBRE Residential and Beauchamp, which has completed the last remaining sale. CBRE Residential and Beauchamp

12/15 London’s most expensive office A newly refurbished office in the heart of Mayfair measuring 6,000 sq ft was unveiled by Enstar Capital in October. At £500 per sq ft, it is set to be the most expensive commercial fit out ever undertaken in the West End, according to the developer. The workspace on 54 Brooks Mews features gold-plated executive washrooms inspired by Armani-hotel in Italy, timber flooring imported from a 16th century monastery in Tuscany and an Art Deco entrance restored with a new “54” entrance logo replicating Steve Rubell’s famous “studio 54” nightclub logo from the seventies. While the director’s floor include a rooftop terrace dressed with loungers and an outside meeting and dining table. Enstar Capital

13/15 Former garage in Mayfair become world’s most expensive mews house at £24m in Mayfair In September, the world’s most expensive mews house, in Reevews Mews, sold to a Qatari buyer for an eye-watering £24 million.

14/15 A penthouse where you canoe from your front door, yours for £16.95 million London luxury dockside complex located on Chelsea creek is due for completion by the end of 2016. But its luxury flats are already on sale including this penthouse yours for £16.95 million. It’s future residents will be able to slip down the river for a work out on the water at anytime of the day.

15/15 The only property in London too expensive for the city’s super-rich property buyers A 45 bed-room mansion near Hyde Park, previously owned by a Saudi Prince, received a private bid for £280 million. If accepted this would have made the property he most expensive single home ever to be sold in Britain. It was originally listed with an asking price of £300 million –more than double the price of the UK’s second most expensive home.

We’re only tied to our location for as long as the contract lasts, and if we want to leave sooner, it’s a relatively simple case of finding a new tenant to replace us. If we want to travel, there’s no worrying about who’ll pay the mortgage while we’re away. If our dream job comes up in another city, or even another country, we can move in a matter of weeks. House repairs come out of the landlord’s pocket.

It’s easy to dismiss the “happy renter” outlook as rose-tinted, middle-class hogwash, but on the contrary, myself and the friends who feel this way are from largely working class backgrounds. Perhaps that’s given me lower expectations, but the fact that I can’t paint my bedroom wall seems utterly insignificant after growing up in a house with no wallpaper whatsoever. I’m proud that I’ve reached a point in my life and career where working and living anywhere of my choice is a viable option, and it’s renting that makes it so.

Plenty of surveys show that flexibility is held in high regard by millennials. Deloitte found that 44 per cent of us want to leave our current jobs in the next two years and Econsultancy found that 69 per cent of all graduates thought freelancing was a more attractive option than long-term employment. Mortgage lenders are notoriously wary of freelancers, but that isn’t putting that 69 per cent off from wanting to be self-employed, or, indeed, the 1.9 million people who already are: between 2008 and 2015, the number of freelance workers rose by 36 per cent even as house prices rocketed after the recession.

The most expensive cities for new builds revealed







5 show all The most expensive cities for new builds revealed







1/5 London London has been revealed as the most expensive city globally to buy a new-build, where one sq ft is worth £2,000 Getty

2/5 Hong Kong Hong Kong comes in at a close second, where the cost per sq ft is £1,950 Getty

3/5 New York A new-build in New York is the third most expensive at £1,800 per sq ft STAN HONDA/AFP/Getty Images

4/5 Sydney Sydney comes in as the fourth most expensive place to buy a new-build at £1,200 per sq ft Getty Images

5/5 Paris Paris is the fifth most expensive, where new-builds are £1,100 per sq ft Rex Features

American commentators understand that some people simply don’t want to buy houses. As one recent popular article stated, millennials are “[thinking] differently about what it means to “own” something”. Elsewhere, Fortune has opened a discussion on why we expected millennials to want to own houses at an age when they haven’t settled into their careers or started families yet.

We need more of this thinking in the UK, and we need policymakers to focus on making the rental industry viable for long-term use by means of Berlin-style rent caps, restrictions on multiple buy-to-lets, a crackdown on unaffordable luxury developments, and less loopholes for unscrupulous landlords.

The current property market isn’t working, and the emphasis on profit and status needs removing. Renting isn’t for those who are down on their luck; with improvement, it could be the future.