The main reason behind the leave vote on 23 June, at least according to the polls, was to take back control – to repatriate lawmaking powers from Brussels to Westminster. But if that was the emotional appeal, the most tangible prospect was of an immigration policy made in Britain. The challenge that now faces British politicians – in particular the government, which is committed, in the prime minister’s words, to making Brexit mean Brexit – is to work out how to respond to voters’ fears in a way that is clear and transparent and economically viable too. That means balancing freedom of movement with access to the single market. A result, in Brexit terms, must be fewer EU workers.

That, however, raises another set of difficult questions: questions about who will do the jobs that EU workers were coming to the UK to do, and what they will be paid. Britain’s infamous low-wage sectors – agriculture and food processing, clothing manufacture and retail, domestic services – are already facing two significant new pressures. The national living wage is already in play and will increase hourly wages to approximately £9 an hour by 2020. Then, from next May, for larger employers, the apprenticeship levy will also be applied. If, in addition, there are fewer EU workers, that is likely to mean more upward pressure on pay. Some employers are already clawing back other benefits in response to the living wage, and warning of existential threats.

Contemplating the consequences of Brexit is clarifying the real impact of the movement of 21st-century labour. The latest research from the Resolution Foundation summarises the impact of high levels of migration from the new accession countries after 2004. It acknowledges that those who argued that migration was an unmitigated good, growing the economy to the benefit of all, overstated their case – almost as much as did those who argued that migration was invariably harmful. The latter were right that in low-paying sectors, wages were held down. But EU migrants also tended to contribute more in taxes than they received in benefits. Maybe the biggest impact is contradictory: it concealed the other marked development in the period, particularly after the 2008 crash – the wider stagnation of wages.

Of course, pay was not the only reason that migrant workers came to be so resented. Queues for doctors’ appointments and overcrowded classrooms were easier to see than differences in pay, and they played a bigger part in fuelling resentment. Yet in the same way that migration concealed structural change in wages, its impact on public services served as a distraction from the real cost of the austerity measures brought in by the coalition government in 2010.

What is already becoming clear, and will only become clearer as EU membership is more fully examined, is that Britain’s labour market does not function well. If EU migration has held pay down, it ought to follow that pay will go up in response to the labour shortages that are likely to be the consequence of a cut in migration. Not so much, according to the Resolution Foundation. The original impact of cheap labour was to cut at most a few pence off wages, and only from the pay of “native” workers with no qualifications; on the foundation’s projections, the likely effect of cutting EU economic migration will simply reverse that. And if, as projected, the economy shrinks, it is likely to mean a downward pressure on wages that could outweigh the impact of labour shortages.

In theory, scarce labour should also be an incentive to invest and modernise in a way that the plentiful supply of low-paid workers has made unnecessary until now. The teams of car valets from Lithuania will be replaced by an upgraded version of the drive-through car wash that had almost disappeared, and supermarkets will at last introduce the kind of electronic pricing system that is commonplace in France. UK productivity may even show an improvement. But it would also upend the British labour market model where high levels of employment are set against hyper-flexible working and low pay. Post Brexit, there may be fewer jobs, but they will be better paid.

So far, so good. But there are much wider consequences, not least for millions of local authority workers and the councils that pick up their wages bill. There is a crisis already in the care home sector, and the NHS is in the grip of its worst ever cash shortage. Faced with challenges like this, the government will have to take some hard decisions about how it meets its pledge to the Brexiteers.