No Olympic Games can entirely escape the backwash of conventional political tensions, and Rio is no exception. Israel is angry because Lebanese athletes refused to share a bus to Friday’s opening ceremony. Serbia has issued instructions, almost certainly superfluous, that its athletes are to boycott any medal ceremony if it also involves an athlete from Kosovo, whose independent status is newly recognised by the International Olympic Committee.

But in Rio something more is happening. The US swimmer Lilly King is in open conflict with her Russian rival Yuliya Efimova, who was only cleared to compete on Saturday after serving a doping ban. China launched a stream of political invective against Australia, of which “a country on the fringes of civilisation” was the least offensive, after the Australian Mack Horton first defeated and then criticised the Chinese swimming legend Sun Yang, another athlete who has served a suspension for doping. The British cyclist Lizzie Armitstead, who missed three doping tests but was allowed to race after her excuse for one was accepted, met a chilly reception among fellow competitors – apparently even by her own team – at the start of the women’s road race, where she finished fifth. The IOC’s timid decision to dodge its responsibility to show its intent to clean up athletics by banning all Russian athletes – as anti-doping campaigners wanted – and instead to allow individual sports federations to police its own competitors has backfired. In avoiding one problem, it has created another. Mistrust between competitors is souring the atmosphere and fuelling fans’ scepticism about the integrity of the once-in-a-lifetime sporting moment they have come to watch.

It is to the great credit of the International Paralympic Committee, headed by Sir Philip Craven, that it took seriously the report done for the World Anti-Doping Agency by the Canadian lawyer Professor Richard McLaren. His investigation found that Russia had set up a state-sponsored system to cheat, one where specimens were swapped, tampered with or lost. As the Guardian’s Owen Gibson reported exclusively at the weekend, Sir Philip’s committee decided to take a much tougher line than the IOC and ban all Russian athletes from next month’s Paralympics. He acknowledged that it was tough on clean athletes, but the Russian system was so “broken, corrupted and entirely compromised” that it must face the ultimate sanction.

The first victims of doping are the fans, deprived of a contest that they can believe in. But stealing the integrity of sport has other casualties too. As Sir Philip said, athletes sometimes tried to cheat a system, but the Russians had set up a system that cheated athletes, as well as athletics fans. They are the ones who will now feel the pain and injustice of a blanket ban. For those who have lost years and years of hard work and training, it is impossible not to feel sympathy. But it also impossible not to feel sympathy for all those athletes who have lost out to drugs cheats, the men and women whose victory is owed not to talent and effort alone but to the duplicitous use of performance-enhancing substances.

Athletics has been heading into a dangerous spiral for a long time and neither the individual sports federations nor the international sporting bodies have shown the courage to confront it. The Paralympics’ committee decision has exposed quite how gutless the IOC has been, too anxious to avoid offending President Putin and not nearly anxious enough to rescue the reputation of athletics. Instead, it has been left to the Olympic athletes themselves to demonstrate the repugnance of competitors with a doping record. In some cases it may seem harsh. But until every country has a testing regime that withstands independent scrutiny, and sports’ governing bodies brook no excuses, it is only the athletes themselves who can save the reputation of their sports.