
Why do the left dislike Katharine Birbalsingh? It’s hard to understand the vitriol spewed at the headteacher and school founder. A letter signed by her deputy head from the free school she founded about “lunch isolation” made media headlines – and as ever, the internet went mad.
The problem stems from the outside world misunderstanding the ethos of the Michaela community school in north-west London. On the surface, the letter warning a parent that their child would be isolated from other pupils at lunchtime if they didn’t pay for school meals may seem draconian – but there is an underlying contract with pupil, parent and school that ensures the school’s success and emphatically justifies the letter’s tone. In truth, it was not, as some have suggested, about punishing the child, but about shaming the parent to meet their obligation (upon enrolment a contract is signed which sets out what is expected from all parties).




Headteacher defends policy of putting pupils in 'lunch isolation'




And, if you’d ever met Birbalsingh, you’d know she would never harm her children; she’s totally committed to them.
I first encountered her in 2012, when she asked me to make a short film about the nature of a “free school”, as she attempted to found one. It was my first foray into the workings of education as a documentary-maker and I had no preconceived ideas about free schools, or Birbalsingh.
But the reason I offered my services free of charge to assist her project was that I’d witnessed her devotion to her pupils. It was reflected in the long hours she worked and the respect she’d earned from those she was teaching.
As I filmed her pitching her new school offering to parents in public forums, it became apparent that she wanted to redress the low expectations the education system traditionally has for poor, predominantly black children.


VIDEO


Michaela Community School - A New Education


She wanted instead to bring aspiration, education and above all discipline into her pupils’ lives to ensure for them a solid future.
What surprised me was how the system seemed keen to prevent her.
As an outside observer, it was difficult to understand, when prospective parents were talking about their children needing strict discipline and a formal education, why the Labour council in south London where she originally wanted to set up her school and the National Union of Teachers didn’t support her.
But the antipathy towards Birbalsingh on the left stems from her speech at the Conservative party conference in 2010 when she highlighted the problems she saw for her pupils. The speech wasn’t for a political career, but for the education of those she felt she failed. Yet she immediately became the poster girl for the Tories – and nobody in the Labour party or the leftwing teaching unions was going to judge her on her teaching merits now.
She endured racism, abuse from her own profession, political attacks, and some local authorities were intent on undermining her (the original school planned for Lambeth was scuppered when the council said the site, the location of a crumbling school, was unsuitable for education and sold the land to a private property developer). In 2014, she finally founded the school in Wembley.
Last year, she asked me to return to the school to record the children’s experiences after the first year’s intake. What I witnessed was simply astounding: impeccably well dressed, inordinately polite and perfectly ordered schoolchildren who were clearly immensely proud of their establishment, with a real passion for reading and debate; and staff whose commitment to their pupils was palpable.




What kind of school punishes a hungry child? | Jack Monroe




But above all it was the pupils’ stories from their previous schools that vindicated Birbalsingh’s approach.
One boy explained how he had been bullied in his previous school and neither staff nor other pupils had come to his aid. Here, he said, they were taught respect and bullying was not tolerated on any level by pupils or staff.
Every pupil we spoke to was happy, loved learning, expected to attend an Oxbridge college and without exception appreciated the discipline. And that discipline extends to the family, too.
As one pupil put it: “It’s hard to get used to the discipline at first, but when you see how much more you can get done when your classroom is quiet and people respect you, you begin to like it.”
Yet it is these pupils whose voices have been completely absent from any discussion over the furore surrounding the lunch letter. The left would do well to remember that education should first and foremost be about the children it is meant to serve and without doubt, Birbalsingh serves them very well indeed.

