
“Go home you greasy wog!”. Those words, yelled at me in anger by classmates who didn’t know any better, still sting. This didn’t happen often, and not nearly as often as my parents’ generation experienced, but for me it was a taste of what racism is and does. Racism is hateful and it damages people.
What Pauline Hanson did on Wednesday night in our national parliament was a racist and bigoted speech that sought to divide and hurt people. She chose to scapegoat an entire community for the problems some people experience. It was a calculated and shameful speech designed to stoke fear and division in our community.
Like many Australians, my Greens colleagues and I were bracing for Pauline Hanson’s speech on Wednesday night like never before for a parliamentarian’s first speech. Two decades ago we’d all witnessed the damage words by this same public figure sought to do to people, to whole communities, to a nation. So as this Senator Hanson was preparing to do damage once more, my Greens colleagues and I shared our concerns and discussed what we might do if she crossed a line. 




Pauline Hanson calls for immigration ban: 'Go back to where you came from'




We were guided by the words of Australian of the Year Lieutenant General David Morrison who said that “the standard you walk past is the standard you accept”.
Senator Hanson didn’t just cross a line, she deliberately trashed it.
We chose to walk out of the Senate while Ms Hanson was speaking because we did not want to give any kind of legitimacy to her racist views and to the racist views of others by sitting and listening with the respect usually afforded to parliamentarians during their first speech.
We believed that as Muslims across the country heard the words and felt the hate directed at them from Pauline Hanson’s speech it was important her message was countered, drowned out if possible, by messages of welcome and respect.
And we felt an obligation to stand up for not only Muslims but for the millions of Australians who welcome multiculturalism and an Australia that does not judge you on the colour of your skin or your religious beliefs.
Some have suggested that by walking out we were taking Pauline Hanson seriously and granting her power she did not deserve. But the uncomfortable fact is that Pauline Hanson does have power; she was elected into the parliament, not through preferences but in her own right.
Senator Hanson has received unprecedented levels of coverage of her racist views, even as a paid commentator by network news. To suggest she could just be allowed to preach hate and fade into the background is ludicrous. And to suggest the Greens elevated the coverage of her second maiden speech is similarly so. The coverage would have been those hateful words beamed into living rooms and personal devices across the globe but with no strong counter message that this is not Australia.
The 45th Parliament risks being the most divisive parliament in Australia’s history but it doesn’t have to be. Moments like those we saw this week should be used by parliamentarians as opportunities to bring communities together not to divide them. If feedback by the Muslim community is anything to go by I believe we did just that.
Yesterday as news of the Greens “walk out” spread the phones in my office began to ring off the hook. In the morning the callers were mainly men who supported Pauline Hanson, angry at what we had done. Then, something remarkable began to happen. Muslims across the country started calling and thanking us. Some had received a text message, others an email or social media post, from their friends and networks, urging people to call.




The most troubling thing about Pauline Hanson's view of Muslims? The facts no longer matter | Susan Carland




As the night wore on the calls were in their hundreds and showed no signs of letting up so I sat down with my team to help with the call load. I spoke to one man who told me he had just returned from evening prayers at his mosque where the imam urged the many in attendance to go home and call the Greens and thank us for our stance. We called for reinforcements from my colleague’s offices.
As I continued to listen to the voices of Muslim Australians, sometimes speaking to multiple people in one family on the one call, I heard why it was so important to them that we did what we did. 
One call in particular resonated with me. A mother told me she was worried about the effect words like those we heard on Wednesday night will have on her children the following day in the schoolyard and on the bus. I told her I understood.

