




Trying to atone, Georgetown University accused of excluding slave descendants




Slavery is a footnote in the history of many universities in the United States. Mostly, that’s where it stays. But not for Georgetown, which sold 272 slaves in 1838. The university wants to come to terms with its past and take the abstract concepts of reconciliation and redemption and make them tangible. Will they succeed?
In their announcement, I heard the buzzwords “diversity” and “inclusion” several times, and those trend words put me on edge. Organizations use those terms all the time and little comes from the effort to make elitist and exclusionary circles more accessible. I was also turned off by the school’s decision to grant the slaves’ descendants legacy access without any guaranteed financial support.
The arrangement means that even if an applicant and his or her family are able to overcome many of the systemic and institutional injustices that African Americans faced in the wake of slavery, the chance to attend Georgetown might still be compromised due to finances.




Georgetown traded in slaves? Of course it did. That was America | Jamiles Lartey




I know it is impossible to place a price tag on demoralization and dehumanization. There is no calculator that can account for the cultural and economic legacies of slavery and discrimination. Yet every couple years there’s the talk of reparations. A recent article by Yes! Magazine estimates that the “40 acres and a mule” promise would be worth $6.4tn. But we are far off from seriously considering that kind of justice. 
So do we take what atonement we can get and then hold institutions accountable? In a world where white students are ready to challenge affirmative action, and people question racism’s existence even as we watch people being shot and murdered for misdemeanors, that might be the pragmatic approach.
Georgetown’s decision could forever change the way we talk about inheritance, legacy and community. The university has decided to invest part of its endowment in unpacking the complex issue of slavery, and the racial inequality the system of selling human cargo created. The move could cause other educational and cultural giants to assess their privilege and question their historical and cultural competency. 
Imagine what we could accomplish as a community, and as a nation, if we spent time reflecting upon our country’s darker historical moments as tool to create a better future. Would the world implode if we were able to recognize that slavery was part of the social order, the social construct that our systems were built upon? No. But it would give our current system a strong and much-needed shake. 
After all, people argued with Michelle Obama when she mentioned that the White House was built by slaves, without knowing that it actually was. And Colin Kaepernick catches flack for his decision to sit during the national anthem to protest the treatment of minorities in the US. But few of his critics know that the lyricist of The Star Spangled Banner, Francis Scott Key, was a slaveholder when the song was composed in 1814.
We need this because many in the US are ready to join the debate about the burkini ban, forgetting that just a few decade ago, African Americans weren’t allowed to swim in public pools.
Does an admission like Georgetown’s fill the desire for healing and reconciliation that the nation needs? Maybe not, but it is the start to a much-needed conversation.

