
Bill Clinton has been called our country’s first black president. As Toni Morrison put it in a piece for the New Yorker in 1998, Clinton was “blacker than any actual black person who could ever be elected in our children’s lifetime.” Yet, just six years later at the Democratic national convention, America would meet the bright-eyed, once-in-a-lifetime political talent known as Barack Obama.
If a white guy like Clinton helped pave the way for America’s first black president, then perhaps it’s fitting that Obama should pave the way for the country’s first female president. And on Thursday that’s exactly what he did when he called himself a feminist in the starkest terms yet, in a highly personal essay about the challenges and rewards of raising two daughters in the White House.
“Yes, it’s important that their dad is a feminist, because now that’s what they expect of all men,” he wrote in an essay published in Glamour.
It’s a title he’s taken on before, at the White House Summit on the United State of Women back in June, but this time it felt different. Obama wasn’t writing as part of the news cycle, which has otherwise been dominated by the obsessive chronicling of Donald Trump’s missteps and the implosion of the Republican party. Rather he was writing on his birthday, a celebration of life and bittersweetly – for a nation sorely in search of poetry and grace this election cycle – his final year in office.
It is a look back at the most personal sort of legacy a president could ever have: that of helping his daughters Sasha and Malia grow into enlightened young women and serving as husband to the love of his life Michelle, the country’s first black first lady. But it was also a look forward into the future.
There’s still a lot of changes to be made at the policy level, promoting equal pay to protecting reproductive rights among them. One such needed change came just yesterday, when Massachusetts became the first state to make it illegal for employers to ask job applicants what they earned previously, a policy known to contribute to the enduring gender wage gap. It’s time every employer in every state did the same.
But today, on his 55th birthday, the president was interested in the kind of change that transcends policy and his presidency, which will soon come to an end. As he put it: “There are some changes that have nothing to do with passing new laws. In fact, the most important change may be the toughest of all – and that’s changing ourselves.”
For the most powerful man in the world to write about how gender stereotypes hurt not just women but men – which is to say, everyone – is a radical act.
And it’s radical that he wrote it in a women’s magazine, a category of media that’s been written off as fluff by political literati for practically as long as they’ve been around. Glamour and other outlets geared toward women have made it clear in recent years that they will be part of the political conversation, launching projects like Glamour’s the 51 Million, an election platform named for the number of young women eligible to vote in this year’s election.
Absurdly, they still, in 2016, have to fight to be taken seriously in a way that men’s outlets like GQ and Esquire never did.
I’m proud of my president for publishing the essay in Glamour and for writing in a way that’s at least as directed at men as it is toward women. And influencers who are reluctant to share a message that comes under the pink block letters that spell out Glamour’s name, or write it off because of that package, are part of the culture problem the president is speaking out against when he writes about the stereotypes that affected him as a young man.
“Growing up without a dad, I spent a lot of time trying to figure out who I was, how the world perceived me, and what kind of man I wanted to be,” Obama wrote. “It’s easy to absorb all kinds of messages from society about masculinity and come to believe that there’s a right way and a wrong way to be a man. But as I got older, I realized that my ideas about being a tough guy or cool guy just weren’t me. They were a manifestation of my youth and insecurity. Life became a lot easier when I simply started being myself.”
Yes, this is powerful because it comes from the president but it’s more than that. With his powers of self-reflection and gift for articulating those insights, Obama is a role model for would-be feminist men in a way that nobody else can be.
He’s used those gifts alongside Michelle to teach his daughters to recognize gender double standards when they see them and speak out about them, and now he’s hoping to use them to show ordinary Americans how they can do the same and help the women around them do the same.
He delves into intersectionality in a way that only the country’s first black president could, channeling Michelle’s struggle as America’s first black Flotus to eschew the two stereotypes waiting to swallow her identity: that of “angry” black woman on one hand, and that of docile first lady on the other.
And he’s doing it not to be politically correct as Trumpian thinking would have you believe, but because it gets at something powerful, which is the universality of fighting sexism and constrictive gender identities. “Rigid notions of identity isn’t good for anybody – men, women, gay, straight, transgender, or otherwise,” he wrote. “These stereotypes limit our ability to simply be ourselves.”
But most of all, he’s building toward the notion that for a woman to be a major political party’s nominee 240 years after our country’s founding is historic no matter what your politics. That it’s a measure of how far women have come in their struggle for equality from almost a century ago when we were only just winning the right to vote.
That isn’t about what political party you support, it’s about whether you believe in equal opportunity in pursuing something as beloved by conservatives as the American Dream. Twenty-first century feminism, he argued, is about the simple but profound notion that “when everybody is equal, we are all more free”.
The essay sets a hopeful tone for how Obama might continue to use his influence and gifts beyond the gates of the White House. He’s only 55 years old, after all, and the pain of losing him is palpable in America.
It was palpable at the Democratic convention last week when, as he took the stage in Philadelphia, a party rocked by unity wars and rounds of booing even the most progressive heroes, spontaneously erupted into strains of Amazing Grace.
And it’s palpable when, on his birthday, he turns around and gives America the gift of this essay on how to be a feminist, even – and maybe especially – as a powerful man.
Happy birthday, Mr President. And thanks.

