SIR – I served on the Royal Yacht Britannia from 1989-1991. She had been refitted in 1986, and at that point three options – a 10-year refit, 20-year refit and a new yacht – were looked at. Because of changes in regulations at sea at the end of 1997, the 20-year refit was the most expensive option.

There were good reasons for building a new yacht. It was cheaper than refitting Britannia to get her over the 1997 hurdle. In addition, the Royal Navy was phasing out steam turbines in surface ships, so Britannia’s engines would have had to be changed. During royal and diplomatic events, Britannia was often not quite big enough.

The great reason for keeping Britannia, as opposed to replacing her, was that the whole world seemed to know what she was and who she represented. I don’t believe we had a single refusal to an invitation on-board during my time. This included all the invitations to industrial days, which brought in so much for this country.

In my opinion it is obvious that this country would be better off with a royal yacht than without one. I believe the finances more than stacked up if you took into account the deals done by using Britannia as a base. The problem, as we saw it, was that we were paid for out of the wrong budget. All costs were borne by the Ministry of Defence, whereas the benefit was gained by the Foreign Office and by trade and industry.

Whether there is a new yacht or Britannia is returned to service, it is imperative that this is done quickly, so that the knowledge and experience of the last crew to man her can be used to show off the yacht at its best. Then post-Brexit Britain will again be able to rule the waves.

George Watson

Woodbridge, Suffolk

SIR – Any plan to recommission Britannia ignores the fact that you cannot just take her out of the port at Leith and put her to sea.

Her machinery would require a complete overhaul. The necessary engineering crew would also be hard to find as there are very few left with experience of steam turbine-driven ships. The Royal Navy is already short of engineering members to crew its current fleet.

Ian Ling

Ware, Hertfordshire

SIR – There could not be a better time than now to construct a new royal yacht: designed in Britain, built in Britain, fitted out with modern but stately interiors, and laid out to act as both VIP transport and a floating trade fair.

Clever use of one, perhaps with the Queen or the Duke and Duchess of Cambridge on board, would give us a bit of extra soft power as we send out our trade delegations and negotiating teams. The project might also give a boost to the reputation of our manufacturing industries, just as they attempt to rediscover wider markets.

Luke Magee

Ashford, Kent

Child asylum seekers