SIR – Mr Bliss refers to the precise footwork of the Suffolk Punch. I spent a summer helping to bring in the corn harvest on a farm that used 16 of these magnificent beasts instead of tractors.

I was assigned to work with Rodney, a colossal stallion with the strength to pull a fully-laden hay cart. Like many horses, he would puff out his stomach when I cinched his girth harness so it would not be too tight, but it could cause soreness if left too loose. Once, early in our relationship, I gave him a prod with my pitchfork in an attempt to make him release his breath.

He responded by placing one of his enormous front hooves on my foot, applying just enough pressure to hurt without crippling me for life, while giving me a hard stare which clearly said “mind your manners – I’m bigger than you”. Precise footwork indeed.

Brian Halling

Stratford-upon-Avon, Warwickshire

Grahame’s inspiration

SIR – Far from diminishing the riverside inspiration of Kenneth Grahame’s Wind in the Willows, the National Trust’s plans for Winter Hill will return it to the landscape the author would have known.

It seems unlikely that Winter Hill could have inspired the Wild Wood, as at the time the book was published (1908) the hill was open chalk grassland.

The Trust’s plans, which follow wide consultation with the local community, will see some trees removed from the top of Winter Hill in order to reopen the historic views over the Thames.

The nature-rich grassland will be restored on the slope. Good news for Toad, Ratty and Mole.

Nicola Briggs

Regional Director, London and the South East, National Trust

London SW1

Dumb meter

SIR – My foreign-owned energy supplier has recently installed a “smart” meter in my home. However, the new meter can do no more than count the units.

The engineer explained that this is because there is only weak mobile phone reception in my area (I could have told him that), which meant that he was unable to download the software necessary to make it operate more effectively. He added that I now have a dumb meter.

I trust there will not be similar software problems at Hinkley Point.

Colin Henderson

Cranleigh, Surrey

Bags of bags

SIR – Like Mary Fraser Burns (Letters, September 11), I have been plagued with charity bags wedged half into the letterbox almost daily.

I put a polite notice on the front door saying: “No more charity bags, please.” It has worked.

Linda Bos

Midhurst, West Sussex

SIR – The charity bags I receive are not unwanted.

Since supermarkets started charging for their bags, I have suffered a severe shortage – and am therefore very grateful for any donations of bags that pop through my letterbox.

Allan Hook

Brighton, East Sussex

SIR – Clothing collection sacks are rarely left directly by the named charity. They arrive from profit-making companies that pledge to donate a proportion of their profits, or an annual lump sum, to the named charity.

The small print on the wrapper gives details of the collecting company, and a (free) visit to the Companies House website will disclose the company details as well as the names and addresses of directors.

I suggest Miss Fraser Burns directs her displeasure to them, and insists that the nuisance is immediately terminated. However, it might take more than one letter to produce the desired result.

Alan E Quaife

Loughton, Essex