Don’t be surprised that Love Productions took The Great British Bake Off elsewhere – the way the BBC works nowadays, it was inevitable.

Is it too snobby to admit that I preferred the first couple of series of the show? You know, the ones with the original format, where the Bake Off tent moved to various locations around the country and each episode included a little baking history lesson covering the origins of, say, the Eccles cake or Bath bun. Or is that just the thirtysomething equivalent of telling you I liked that band before they went completely mainstream and I rather prefer their earlier work? Well, I did, and I do.

And now, with the disappointing news that, from next year, The Great British Bake Off will move from the BBC to Channel 4, there’ll be much less of it too.

Already shrunk to an innuendo-laden two minute occasional segment, once the adverts begin to impinge the local culinary history will be done away with altogether. Say goodbye also to the sleepy church-fete atmosphere inside the grand marquee, as the tension between the contestants is ramped up, the challenges made more puerile, and the lurid personal backstories become the dominant theme of the show. What happened to our quaint, sedate afternoon on a deckchair with a slice of lemon drizzle and a flask of Earl Grey?

I’m speculating, of course, but not so wildly. The loss of Bake Off is bad news for the BBC; it’s a sign of its failures, and an indication of its diminishing significance as a creative player in British broadcasting. No wonder Bake Off’s legion of crumb-strewn armchair fans feel bruised.

In the court of public opinion, this slip-up matters far more than any Government bun-fight over the future of the corporation and its well-paid flunkies. Viewers feel upset that the most watched television show of 2015 will move off the state broadcaster to a commercial entity, even if – apart from having to sit through the adverts (which are also, it must be noted, a good opportunity put the kettle on) – they can’t quite put their finger on why.

The BBC hit upon that when a statement from an official spokesperson, lamenting the decision of Love Productions to chase the money, claimed Bake Off was “a quintessentially BBC programme”. In translation: it is the sort of unexpected televisual success that only state investment, unencumbered by the requirement to chase audience and sponsorships, can breed.

The first series, buried away on BBC2, was panned by TV critics. Later a hit with British housewives, master baker and judge Paul Hollywood was described by Iain Hollingshead of the Telegraph as “sinister without being interesting” and warned prospective viewers they risked boring themselves to death. Never mind: the viewers followed, and the so did the switch to prime time, and to BBC1. A hit – and an exportable format, too. What a shame that the BBC never really owned it in the first place.

I don’t know whether Love Productions cast around widely for a backer in 2009-10, when the programme was first devised, but that it ended up with the BBC is no surprise. On paper, it doesn’t work at all. Who wants to watch 12 people crouching on the floor of a carpeted tent staring into an oven door or wafting a baking tray over a wire rack of hot scones? Oh, but we do. We do!

The BBC is acting as a hothouse for broadcasting potential; it has become a sort of finishing school for good ideas. But, by shrinking its own content teams and farming out the job of development and production to small production houses like Love, the BBC has lost control of its own destiny. When it backs a runner, it is predestined to lose it (rumours suggest the BBC’s bid was £10m short of keeping Bake Off as its own).

The BBC has been struggling to survive and excel on its income for some time. I would, it must be said, be happy to pay a higher television licence in order to preserve the quality and breadth of the BBC, but polling reminds me that I am in the minority – only 41 per cent of Britons support the licence fee system in the first place, and an equal number oppose it altogether. There is no appetite among the public to stump up more, so the corporation has been getting around the problem by cutting. And this – the painful loss of the best British TV success in recent years to a commercial rival – is what death by a thousand cuts looks like. Cut a little bit everywhere, and everything (and everyone) suffers.

This may also prove a watershed moment for how the BBC manages its relatively meagre finances. “The BBC's resources are not infinite,” said a spokesperson. They are not – but they could be better spent. As a regular consumer of some of the more niche BBC offerings – BBC 6 Music is a daily soundtrack in my household, and there are rich pickings to be found in the documentaries archive hidden down the back of the iPlayer – I’ve previously proved aggressively resistant to the argument that sweeping changes must be made to the Beeb’s output; to what it does, where and how. Now I’m willing to concede I may have been wrong.

Who is in the Great British Bake Off 2016 tent?







12 show all Who is in the Great British Bake Off 2016 tent?





















1/12 Rav The 28-year-old could be a comforting presence in the Bake Off tent. With his job supporting students at City University London and his experience of volunteering for charities such as Victim Support, Rav may be the first one to lend a hand to a fellow contestant in need of a shoulder to cry on. Rav lives in Kent with his parents and enjoys using unusual ingredients, taking inspiration from far eastern cuisine and vegan baking. PA

2/12 Benjamina The 23-year-old teaching assistant, who lives in south London, recently gained a first in economics and is known as a straight-A student. She could be her own strongest critic as she is not happy when things do not turn out right. Her other critic is her twin sister, who gives her feedback on her creations. PA

3/12 Val Like Jane, former primary school headteacher Val has a long history of baking. The 66-year-old took over the family baking aged 15 and says she can make the classics with her eyes closed. Now semi-retired, she works two days a week so will find plenty of time to practice her bakes. Originally from Conisbrough, South Yorkshire, but now living near Yeovil, Somerset, she could bring a more unusual touch to the Bake Off tent as she likes to do aerobics in her kitchen while waiting for her jams to boil. PA

4/12 Kate The farmer's daughter from Norfolk could gain an edge by bringing in seasonal fruits and produce gathered from her parents' farm. The 37-year-old mother-of-two has said she thrives on nurturing others and working as a nurse, so she could be a comforting figure in the tent. Sugar craft is her particular strength. PA

5/12 Andrew Originally from Northern Ireland, Andrew lives with friends in Derby and works as an aerospace engineer for Rolls-Royce, designing jet engines. His scientific background could lead to some very precise and beautiful bakes, with creations including a baguette Concorde. The 25-year-old will likely make use of the secret recipes passed down by his mother and grandmother. PA

6/12 Lee The oldest contestant in this year's competition, 67-year-old Lee has gone through many changes in his life - starting his career as a builder before changing direction in the 1980s and studying theology. He has worked as a pastor for the past 30 years and lives in Bolton, and will have the support of his two children and four grandchildren. He first caught the baking bug in 1984 while recovering from a back injury picked up playing cricket. He enjoys traditional flavours such as hazelnut, vanilla and chocolate. PA

7/12 Louise The 46-year-old's piping and icing skills are sure to be spot-on as she loves to decorate her cakes with elaborate designs. Originally from Merthyr Tydfil, she now works as a hairdresser in Cardiff and has developed her love of baking over the last 10 years. She is sure to have the stamina for long days in the tent as she loves mountain walks and has completed a four-day trek in the Andes. PA

8/12 Michael Bake Off viewers are sure to see the influence of Michael's Cypriot heritage in his baking, as he loves to make Greek pastries with his grandmother. The 20-year-old, from London, is studying politics and economics in Durham, where he handles sharing a kitchen with four friends by baking late at night or in the early hours. He may shine in the Showstopper round as he enjoys making "big grand cakes" and combining unusual flavours. PA

9/12 Selasi Long hours working as a client service associate in a financial institution may leave Selasi with little time to practice, but the 30-year-old has impressed his colleagues with the cupcakes he makes for charity bake sales. Originally from Ghana, he moved to the UK 15 years ago and now lives in London. PA

10/12 Jane With a grandfather who owned a bakery and a father who loved to cook, 61-year-old Jane will draw on a long family history of creating breads and cakes. The garden designer, from Beckenham, south-east London, likes to start early, getting her bread in the oven at 5am most mornings. Expect a strong showing in the technical challenges as she knows her classic cakes, biscuits and pastries. PA

11/12 Tom The 26-year-old grew up in Rochdale, Greater Manchester, but now works in London as a project engagement manager for The Royal Society of Arts. Having lost 30kg, he enjoys his bakes but believes in eating them in moderation. Tom makes his own cheese and salami from scratch, so judge Mary Berry is unlikely to scold him for cutting corners. PA

12/12 Candice The 31-year-old was inspired to bake by her grandmother and hopes to follow in her footsteps - aiming to be "even half the lady she was". She grew up in the pubs her parents ran and now lives in Bedfordshire, working in pastoral care and PE teaching at a secondary school. PA

Does my beloved 6 Music need to broadcast through the night? I’m not so sure. I certainly don’t need to read lifestyle features on the BBC’s website; there are many free alternatives that offer the same service.The furore over the closure of the online recipe hub proves that every part of the BBC’s diverse output will have its vocal supporter base. But put it in these terms: if it means that the BBC can no longer afford its most popular show – with an audience of 15 million, a cross section of the British public – maybe these niche areas are simply not worth it?

There is one glimmer of hope for Bake Off fans reluctant to switch channels. In the state it’s in, what the BBC needs is advocates among its stars – and in comedy duo Mel and Sue it may have found them. The BBC just confirmed that the pair will step down as co-hosts of the show when it moves to Channel 4. One expects that a wedge of extra cash per episode would have been coming their way had they stayed, so it is admirable that the two appear to have stood up for the show’s founding ideals as a non-commercial, advertising-free format.

Good for them, but the show is still lost – not just to the BBC but, with the loss of its core talent, to the nation, too.