




Tell us how you got here: share your stories of immigration




I am not what most people think of when they imagine a Hispanic immigrant. I am paler than most lily-white Americans, I live in a leafy suburb, and my English is better than my Spanish. There’s also the small detail that I do not remember my own immigration. 
 I came to the US shortly after my first birthday, on an American Airlines flight from El Dorado airport in Bogotá, Colombia, to Dulles international airport in the suburbs of Washington DC, in 1999. My parents were both professionals with graduate degrees. My father was moving from a job in a management consultancy in Bogotá to one near Washington. I had been born in Bogotá to a Colombian mother, from the Caribbean city of Barranquilla, and a Colombian American father whose early life acted as a mirror to mine. While I was born in Bogotá and raised in Washington DC, he was born in Washington DC and raised in Bogotá. 
 My grandparents were part of the politically active professional class of Colombia, and both my parents went to university in the US. Before I was born, they had lived in Paris for three years before moving back to Colombia for my father’s job. It was there that I was born. 
 Colombia at the time was not the Colombia of today. It was not a country to which you would see package vacations advertised in the New York Times. Violence due to drug cartels, fascist paramilitaries and communist guerrillas was still rife. My parents must have known that, but they had been away from the country for a while. My father thought that a normal life in Colombia, as they had lived in Paris, was possible. But when my mother heard that blue corneas had a market value, she decided that Colombia was not the place to raise her blue-eyed son. It was at her insistence that my parents moved, with me, to Washington. 




I am a Muslim doctor. I saved a Christian in Pakistan and it nearly cost my life | Anonymous




 Of course, I don’t remember any of that. In all my memories I have lived in Bethesda, Maryland. I never experienced the struggle of learning a new language or fitting into a new culture. My mother became a US citizen in 2004 in order to vote for John Kerry, and apart from occasional trips to visit relatives in Colombia, we were as American a family as any of our white, mainly Wasp neighbors. 
 It was only in high school that I fully understood what it meant when I said that I was from Colombia. Before then, those who asked me tended to be my peers, who had no pre-formed notions of what a Colombian should be, or adults who knew my parents. But adolescence awakens adulthood, and it was in high school that I became conscious that I was an immigrant. People began to say: “You don’t look Colombian” or “You don’t look Hispanic.” They did not mean any harm, and didn’t cause any either. 
 It was also in high school that I met immigrants who remembered their home countries. People from Colombia who spoke with accents utterly distinct to my bland mid-Atlantic English, who could roll their Rs, and who knew the neighborhoods of the city where I had always said I was from. 
Most of my friendship group did not include these newcomers. I had friends from middle school, and as high school progressed I stayed in the same, mainly white, milieu. I took SAT prep courses, fencing, advanced classes – in short, everything you would expect from a teen from upper middle-class American suburbia who is aiming for the Ivies. Not that I have no Hispanic friends; I do. They just tend to be as highly assimilated as I am. 




I was an immigrant who chose to be the wrong kind of doctor: an academic | Mita Choudhury




 I am an immigrant. But in all honesty, I do not know what it is like to leave the country you have known all your life, because the country I remember from my earliest days is the one I live in. But I was born abroad, and that geographical accident builds a silent and invisible wall between me and my purely American-born friends. 

