SIR – Bringing back the Royal Yacht Britannia is a brilliant idea. Britannia earned billions of pounds for Britain and was the envy of all our competitors.

I know. I was there. Between 1980 at Naples and 1997 at Gibraltar, in my then role at British Invisibles (an organisation that promoted financial services out of Britain), I arranged many “sea days” on Britannia around the world. I attended them all and saw the unique business opportunities that the royal yacht offered.

Everyone wanted to be there: heads of state, ministers and businessmen. During many of the sea days, Britannia sailed – ensuring a captive audience.

Britannia could again play a prominent global role for Britain’s trade and financial services.

Gaye Murdoch

London SW3





SIR – A new or refitted Britannia would be a delight to see.

The Royal Marines would protect crew and VIPs on board, but her vulnerability to attack would be virtually insurmountable without an accompanying warship with the ability to counter aggression from sea and air.

Richard Lenton

Stirling





SIR – How do Germany, France, Italy, Japan and the US, for instance, manage to conduct their foreign affairs and export trade without an official yacht? Indeed, one wonders how Britain has managed to get by successfully without one for the past 20 years.

The simple answer is that we have not needed one in the past and never need one again. But the subject keeps on being raised every few years. This time it’s because of Brexit.

We do not have a navy that is capable of defending our shores from drug runners, people smugglers and anyone else who wants to enter Britain to cause mischief – let alone an armed aggressor. There is no justification for wasting money on a royal yacht.

Geoffrey Gibbs

Bristol





SIR – Returning Britannia to the sea would be an exciting prelude to our re-entry into the world as a proud and independent country.

One problem may be the timescale, since the project will need to be up and running as soon as possible, and upgrading the original Britannia (or building a new one) could take years.

A neat solution would be to charter a small cruise liner, rename her and upgrade her to serve as a mobile exhibition centre and occasional home for royalty. This would be a cheaper, quicker and less risky option. It would also mean that cruise operators could provide all the hotel services and navigational expertise.

Anthony Hulbert

Christchurch, Dorset





SIR – Can we not combine the loss of the penny coin with the purchase of a new royal yacht? There are millions of the coins in circulation, so a national collection could go a long way.

Jo Brennan

Sherfield-on-Loddon, Hampshire





The Corbyn delusion