
Prime minister Malcolm Turnbull’s decision not to support Kevin Rudd’s candidacy for the position of United Nations secretary general is the most churlish act of partisan politics in the history of Australian foreign policy.
Turnbull has allowed the hyper-conservatives in his own cabinet to overrule a recommendation by the foreign affairs minister, Julie Bishop, and Turnbull’s own direct encouragement of Rudd.
As a result the selection of the next secretary general just became less interesting, but more important.
The other 12 candidates vying for the job will breathe a sigh of relief that Rudd is not in the race. 
Like Marlon Brando, he could have been a genuine contender. He has the global connections, and more importantly the diplomatic skills to be considered in the front of the existing pack.
Presumably the Turnbull government will now vote for Helen Clark from New Zealand.




Hurt feelings: why did Malcolm Turnbull send Kevin Rudd mixed messages? | Katharine Murphy




But Clark is unacceptable in Washington, and is not well respected among the UN establishment. For Washington, she will always be the anti-nuclear campaigner that forced the split among the “Five Eyes” intelligence community.
After the initial “straw poll” exercise, Portugal’s former socialist prime minister, Antonio Guterres, remains another frontrunner.
But Guterres was prime minister at a time when many believe Portugal had undue political influence in the transition of East Timor to statehood.
The position nominally rotates to the Eastern European grouping in the UN. And there is a strong case for the next secretary general to be a woman.
But neither is it a requirement of the UN charter, and the merit principle should override both these considerations.
If the selection was merit-based, Rudd would get the job. 
From his current position as head of the Asia Society Policy Institute in New York, Rudd has positioned himself as an effective and engaged multilateralist.
The Commission on Multilateralism which he chairs will soon produce a blueprint for the next 10 years of UN reform.
President François Hollande in France and Xi Jingping in China were quietly supporting Rudd’s candidacy. The Obama White House was probably on board. Rudd was close to Hillary Clinton, and she would want to have a say in the election of the next secretary general.
The British position remains unknown; Theresa May has only been in the job for a month, and Downing Street has too much on its plate with Brexit to do much more than follow Washington’s lead.
The Russians will want a compliant Eastern European. But even Putin knows that this will be unacceptable to the US and therefore a compromise candidate is needed.
Rudd would not have sought the Australian government’s endorsement several months ago if he didn’t think there was a chance. Kevin never enters a political race he can’t win. And more often than not, he does.
Although efforts have been made to open up the selection process for the next secretary general, the decision remains one taken behind closed doors by the five permanent members of the security council.
Whoever takes the position will inherit a UN organisation that is dysfunctional, under financial stress and suffering from systemic corruption.
Under Ban Ki-moon, the organisation has drifted towards irrelevance. Conflicts in the Middle East and Africa have proliferated with little sense that the UN can become an effective mediator.
In Africa, peacekeeping forces have allegedly committed atrocious sexual crimes against children that the senior UN leadership failed to take enough action on. Whistleblowers are dismissed or tarnished, while senior staff are not held to account.
The current secretary general has blocked all significant reforms to the organisation, and has prevented the implementation of a more open and transparent culture for the UN. 
Incredibly, Ban Ki-moon has managed to turn the position into neither a secretary nor a general.
The bureaucratic culture has worsened. And the strategic importance of the post has declined.
The challenges for the next secretary general, therefore, are immense. But without Rudd in the race, the field looks decidedly second-rate, and Turnbull’s decision potentially has wider consequences.




Child sex abuse whistleblower resigns from UN




Rudd would have been a reforming secretary general, which is precisely what the organisation needs right now.
He would have brought his bureaucratic and diplomatic skills to change the organisation for the better, including by bringing respect and decency back to New York headquarters.
Without immediate reform, the UN will continue to drift. There is a chance, a small but growing one, that with continuing weak leadership, the UN will go the way of its predecessor, the League of Nations, and eventually fail under the weight of its own irrelevance.
That is not in Australia’s interests. But then Turnbull’s decision was less about national interests and more a cheap political shot at a former rival.

