
One would imagine that the phone call from the Élysée Palace yesterday went something like this:
François: My dear Thérèse, what in the name of Sacré-Cœur do you think you are doing?
Theresa: I just want to go over the details, François.
François: Details? You had 10 years to go over the details, Thérèse. You have given me a big embarrassment. You know my government own EDF and we had to persuade two people to come off the board just to get sign-off on the deal.
Theresa: François, I told you last week it’s Theresa not Thérèse.
François: Theresa, Thérèse, what’s the difference? But you didn’t tell me you were going to do this last week. You knew it was not a good deal for your little Rosbifs: those Labour people have been telling you that for two years. So why you do this now? You cannot be serious!
Theresa: Please, François, do not start talking like John McEnroe or I am ending this conversation right now.
François: But why you wait until after the board take the decision?
Theresa: Because I am a great admirer of Margaret Thatcher and I have waited a long time to say this to a French president: “Couillons! François, couillons!”
We will no doubt have to wait 30 years until the official record of that conversation is declassified, but I’m pretty sure this is the essential flavour of it. The manner and impact of this ill-advised decision will bedevil British-French relations for years to come.




 

The NAO has said that bill-payers will have to stump up nearly £30bn for Hinkley in 'top-up' payments




 

There was a time for sober reflection on what had been a badly negotiated nuclear power contract, which left UK customers paying £92.50MW/h for electricity 35 years into the future, when the cost of onshore wind is already down to £70 and offshore is being delivered for £80. Had the government radically renegotiated the contract two years ago, I would have applauded them.
By leaving it to this late stage they could insist on tweaking the contract to secure a reduced price every year the project is further delayed beyond 2025, but to risk 25,000 jobs and send such an appalling signal to investors about the reliability of the UK as an investment partner is an act of recklessness, as damaging for the manner in which it was done as for its substance.
In 2006, when Labour first gave the go-ahead for new nuclear to secure our energy supplies with low-carbon electricity, there was a bipartisan approach to energy and climate change policy. That consensus has begun to unravel over the past six years with a government obsessed with locking us in to a gas-fuelled future even if that meant fracking under national parks.




Hinkley Point is bad business. Theresa May should put it out of its misery | Simon Jenkins




I support the development of new nuclear as part of the energy mix we need to deliver a low-carbon future. Hinkley Point C itself can provide the UK with 7% of our total expected electricity needs. But providing EDF with a 35-year guarantee of £92.50 per unit of power, with bill-payers topping up the difference if wholesale prices fell below that level, was a catastrophically bad deal. With wholesale prices now half that level, and the costs of other low-carbon power from wind and solar falling dramatically, this rip-off deal can no longer stand.
The National Audit Office earlier this month projected that bill-payers will have to stump up nearly £30bn for Hinkley in “top up” payments, to make up the difference between this guaranteed price and market prices – five times the original estimate of £6bn. This is an outrageously bad deal, particularly as the government has secured no guarantee that Hinkley will start generating power when we really need it in 2025.
With all coal power plants scheduled to shut down by 2025, the UK faces a power crunch if alternative plans aren’t put in place in time. The government’s scheme to incentivise investment in gas power stations has resolutely failed to get any new major gas plants in the infrastructure pipeline. And the constant changing of rules has led to the UK plummeting out of the Ernst & Young index of the top 10 countries for investment in renewables.
For two years, Labour has been calling for the government to develop a plan B, but ministers have told us they didn’t need one. This latest delay could mean the government and public will pay through the roof for expensive back-up capacity to ensure the lights don’t go out.




Why have ministers delayed final approval for Hinkley Point C?




The EU referendum delivered a shockwave to investor confidence, with the manufacturers’ federation EEF reporting that confidence in the sector has slumped across the country since the vote to leave. The government’s decision to postpone a final sign-off on contracts sends an appalling signal to investors, whom ministers have been so desperate to reassure that Britain is “open for business”. This action will speak to investors louder than all their words.
If ministers fail to introduce a taper that would see the guaranteed price drop for every year the project falls behind that 2025 deadline, the government will be giving EDF a blank cheque to delay the project – and guaranteeing that the public will pick up the tab to pay premium price at a time when we do not have the premium need.
Any renegotiation would likely need sign-off from EDF’s board, who have just been rebuffed in a very public humiliation by the UK government. After seven members out of 17 board members yesterday opposed the project, with one of the directors Gérard Magnin resigning in protest at what he called a strategic mistake for the company, it’s far from sure EDF would agree to new terms when the company is facing its own financial problems.
Philip Hammond, the new chancellor, earlier this month called the project a “prerequisite” for a modern economy, stating a firm commitment to making sure the project goes ahead. Perhaps it will. But the price of his new boss’s actions will come back to haunt his balance of payments for many years to come.

