
Coercive control – the emotional manipulation and abuse of a partner – became a crime, with the punishment of up to five years in jail, in 2015. And very few took notice. Today, in contrast, as you read this, an army of celebrities will be on Twitter, pictured clutching a mug, “in solidari-tea with #FreeHelen”, because “no one should live in fear of the person who ‘loves’ them”.
The Helen in question is the fictional Helen Titchener, who this week faces trial on Radio 4’s The Archers, charged with the attempted murder of her husband, Rob; she’s also charged with wounding with intent.
Helen (played by actress Louiza Patikas) will be “in court” every day, taking The Archers a long way from the customary September diet of seeding wheat, weaning lambs and keeping busybody Lynda Snell’s llamas in check.




 

Helen, a nice middle-class girl, has already spent several weeks on remand in prison




 

Three years ago, Helen met Rob (Timothy Watson), a married man with a wife called Jess. Rob eventually married Helen and acquired “parental responsibility” for her small son, Henry. Jess then announces she is pregnant. Helen suggests a paternity test. Rob declares that would mean Helen doesn’t trust him and she wouldn’t want that, would she?
So intensifies Rob’s not so subtle campaign to destabilise Helen, isolating her from friends and family, destroying her confidence and turning Henry against his mother. Rob begins to exercise physical as well as emotional control, determined to make Helen pregnant.
She finally decides to leave. He finds out and goads her in their kitchen, encouraging her to take a knife. Helen stabs Rob, acting in self-defence, to protect herself and her son, as her barrister, Anna Tregorran, will argue in court. If it sounds like a straightforward acquittal, listen in.
Helen, a nice, middle-class girl, albeit with “issues”, has already spent several weeks on remand in prison and is now with her baby in a mother and baby unit. Her distress prompted Michael Gove, when justice minister, to say: “Helen’s plight has shone a light on the position of women in our prisons and reinforces the case for reform.”




Actor who plays Archers villain in shock at social media onslaught




In truth, not quite enough light – yet. Women make up only 5% of the prison population. Around 60% serve sentences of only a few months, almost half are reconvicted within a year and the overwhelming majority are inside for non-violent offences. Prison, instead of punishment in the community, is a costly failure for the taxpayer, victims, the women themselves and their children.
Soaps on radio and television have clout. Long-running stories on social issues such as depression, domestic violence, rape and child sexual abuse appear to influence public opinion. So while there might be many listeners who long to get back to a season of mist and mellow fruitfulness, what outcome in court would penal reformers prefer for Helen?
A conviction would be just the ticket. Helen then spends several episodes and more in jail, many miles from her son, witnessing the scale of the understaffing, the extent of mental ill health and self-harming. Naturally, on appeal she will be released and, since this is fiction, just in time for the harvest festival to reclaim her son, her sanity and her cheese making.
Last year, TV’s British Soap Awards added a category, the social impact award. A current contender has to be the arrival of Riley Carter Millington cast as Kyle Slater, a transgender actor playing a transgender character in EastEnders, a step forward from Julie Hesmondhalgh playing a male to female character (Hayley Cropper) in Coronation Street. Nathalie McDermott, founder of On Road, a charity that works to improve media coverage of misrepresented groups, set up All About Trans a few years ago. One of its aims was to encourage the casting of “a normal guy doing normal stuff who just happens to be trans” in a soap that is in people’s living rooms.
For many millions of viewers and listeners, Helen, Kyle and Hayley are people they know and care about. Far more powerfully than polemics and statistics, fictional characters in popular culture can open the mind and surprisingly speedily. “Darling,” said Rob silkily to the submissive Helen at one twist in The Archers plot, “I’m not a monster.” That millions of listeners now know differently is what builds the bridge to real life.
• Comments will be opened later today

