Justice Lowell Goddard must offer a proper explanation for her decision to stand down so abruptly from the independent inquiry into child sexual abuse which she took up only18 months ago. Her two-line resignation letter is almost an insult to the people in whose interests she was supposed to be working, and her subsequent statement that the inquiry was beset by its history is alarming. To go, just hours after a critical report appeared in the Times suggesting she was not getting a grip on the job and spending too much time in New Zealand (where she lives) and Australia, appears to be a betrayal of the trust placed in her both by Theresa May as home secretary and, more importantly, by the people who had invested their hopes in her ability to hear their stories, expose their abusers and, at the least, act to prevent future children being abused as they were. Only serious illness could justify her decision.

If, as Justice Goddard hinted, the inquiry is too burdened with the troubled history of mistrusted victims, failed attempts to bring abusers to justice and survivors’ lack of confidence in anyone with establishment links, she owes it to everyone involved to explain how it is failing. She should also tell MPs on the home affairs committee, who have made it clear they want to hear from her, if and how she thinks it should carry on.

The most important thing now is that confidence in the inquiry is preserved and, where necessary, rebuilt. Mrs May’s successor as home secretary, Amber Rudd, was right to meet the victims’ and survivors’ consultative panel this morningand reassure them that she and the prime minister remained completely committed to the process. But the Goddard resignation has set hares running. Some knowledgeable observers, such as the former DPP Lord Ken Macdonald, think the inquiry is simply too sprawling. It is already pursuing 13 different investigations (and is likely to conduct many more before it has finished) as well as a review of all previous inquiries to consider lessons learned and a truth commission to bear witness to survivors’ experiences. There are whispers that, with its starting budget of £17.9m, it is overly bureaucratic, too close to the Home Office and dominated by a few big personalities. The first two appointments as chair had to stand down in the face of protests about their establishment links from survivors, and the subsequent role of the very different groups representing them has been hard to establish.

Lord Macdonald and others argue that the whole process must be reset. It will, he believes, be impossible to find a candidate who is both qualified and willing to take on the best-paid, least-enviable job in Whitehall. He fears it will take evidence for years and end up recommending the obvious – while abuse continues unabated. But this process is too big and important to threaten the confidence of those who have invested in it by further delay. Too much progress has been made to go back to the beginning and rethink it, and risk reopening the argument about whether it should be headed by a lawyer or by an independent social work expert, such as Professor Alexis Jay, who led the much-praised inquiry into abuse in Rotherham and is already on the panel.

The inquiry has taken as its model the Australian royal commission on child abuse, which has already sat for three and a half years and is not due to report for another 18 months. The Goddard inquiry was criticised for not getting on. But its work was largely taking place away from the public gaze, and already 100 cases of abuse were being passed to the police each month for further investigation. The hard preliminaries have been done, the programme set. It is reportedly ready and able to continue while a suitable person is identified to chair it and be its public face.

This year’s crime survey estimates that more than 600,000 women and men have been abused in childhood. This inquiry has a vital role protecting the next generation. It must get on with its work, now.