Labour’s win in the Court of Appeal, ruling in favour of blocking the 130,000 supporters who have joined Labour since January, is the final kiss of death for the Party. Yes, the NEC has regained control of the party regulations and undermined Jeremy Corbyn’s authority somewhat, but they have effectively poured petrol onto an already out-of-control bonfire. What was the point in this charade, considering it can’t have actually secured a victory for Owen Smith? The only reasonable consequence is that Corbyn will win again, by a slightly reduced margin.

To add insult to injury, the five members who fought against the ruling now have to cough up £30,000 in legal fees within 28 days. I can’t imagine they’re going to be over the moon about that.

The members who have joined since January are going to be royally pissed off – they have been blocked from voting in the leadership election of their own party, just at the point at which many of them had begun to engage with politics. Regardless of political leaning, it is wholly unfair to deny these individuals the chance to choose their party leader – they have campaigned, they have canvassed and they have paid a membership fee – and it hardly comes across as democratic.

With the Supreme Court refusing the appeal to appeal this decision (I know, it’s getting very tedious), what are the abandoned supporters left with? To what aim is this all happening? Yes, refusing them the right to vote in this election may weaken Corbyn’s power in terms of individual votes – but his grassroots support will most probably increase and mobilise in retaliation. If one glances at Twitter, the tension is palpable – it is not long before this is translated into action.

John McDonnell wanted a revolution to occur – and the NEC has just given him the perfect environment in which this can flourish. People will not just be heading out to vote any longer – they will be heading to the streets, marching against the “establishment” who have taken away their opportunity for real change. The NEC and wider Labour Party have created a toxic image (“You can support us – when it suits us”) which will end up causing one of two things. Either the party will now force a split, as the two factions are so entrenched in this battle that no compromise can possibly be found. Or Corbyn will come into power, with a smaller majority, and mobilise his mass of supporters to oust the remaining Labour stooges who have forced through such measures.

The most ridiculous claims made about Jeremy Corbyn







11 show all The most ridiculous claims made about Jeremy Corbyn



















1/11 He called Hezbollah and Hamas ‘friends’ True. In a speech made to the Stop the War Coalition in 2009, Mr Corbyn called representatives from both groups “friends” after inviting them to Parliament. He later told Channel 4 he wanted both groups, who have factions designated as international terror organisations, to be “part of the debate” for the Middle East peace process. “I use (the word ‘friends’) in a collective way, saying our friends are prepared to talk,” he added. “Does it mean I agree with Hamas and what it does? No. Does it mean I agree with Hezbollah and what they do? No.” Reuters

2/11 ‘Jeremy Corbyn thinks the death of Osama bin Laden was a tragedy’ Partly false. David Cameron used this as a line of attack at the Conservative Party conference but appears to have left out all context from Mr Corbyn’s original remarks. In an 2011 interview on Iranian television, the then-backbencher said the fact the al-Qaeda leader was not put on trial was the tragedy, continuing: “The World Trade Center was a tragedy, the attack on Afghanistan was a tragedy, the war in Iraq was a tragedy.”

3/11 He is ‘haunted’ by the legacy of his ‘evil’ great-great-grandfather False. A Daily Express exposé revealed that the Labour leader’s ancestor, James Sargent, was the “despotic” master of a Victorian workhouse. Addressing the report at the Labour conference, Mr Corbyn said he had never heard of him before, adding: “I want to take this opportunity to apologise for not doing the decent thing and going back in time and having a chat with him about his appalling behaviour.”

4/11 Jeremy Corbyn raised a motion about ‘pigeon bombs’ in Parliament This one is true. On 21 May 2004, Mr Corbyn raised an early day motion entitled “pigeon bombs”, proposing that the House register being “appalled but barely surprised” that MI5 reportedly proposed to load pigeons with explosives as a weapon. The motion continued: “The House… believes that humans represent the most obscene, perverted, cruel, uncivilised and lethal species ever to inhabit the planet and looks forward to the day when the inevitable asteroid slams into the earth and wipes them out thus giving nature the opportunity to start again.” It was not carried.

5/11 He rides a Communist bicycle False. A report in The Times referred to Mr Corbyn, known for his cycling, riding a “Chairman Mao-style bicycle” earlier this year. “Less thorough journalists might have referred to it as just a bicycle, but no, so we have to conclude that whenever we see somebody on a bicycle from now on, there goes another supporter of Chairman Mao,” he later joked.

6/11 'Jeremy Corbyn will appoint a special minister for Jews' False so far. The Sun report in December was allegedly based on a “rumour” passed to the paper by a Daily Express columnist who has written pieces critical of the Labour leader in the past. The minister did not materialise in his shadow cabinet.

7/11 ‘Jeremy Corbyn wishes Britain would abolish its Army’ False. Another gem from The Sun took comments made at a Hiroshima remembrance parade in August 2012 where Mr Corbyn supported Costa Rica’s move to abolish it armed forces. “Wouldn’t it be wonderful if every politician around the world…abolished the army and took pride in the fact that they don’t have an army,” he added. The caveat that “every politician” must take the step suggests Mr Corbyn does not support UK disarmament just yet.

8/11 Jeremy Corbyn stole sandwiches meant for veterans False. The Guido Fawkes blog claimed that the Labour leader took sandwiches meant for veterans at at Battle of Britain memorial service in September but a photo later emerged showing him being handed one by Costa volunteers, who later confirmed they were given to all guests.

9/11 He missed the induction into the Queen’s privy council True. After much speculation about Mr Corbyn’s republican views and willingness to bow to the monarch, his office confirmed that he did not attend the official induction to the privy council because of a prior engagement, but did not rule out joining the body.

10/11 Jeremy Corbyn refuses to sing the national anthem. Partly true. The Labour leader was filmed standing in silence as God Save the Queen was sung at a Battle of Britain remembrance service but will reportedly sing it in future. Mr Corbyn was elusive on the issue in an interview, saying he would show memorials “respect in the proper way”, but sources said he would sing the anthem at future occasions.

11/11 He is a member of the All-Party Parliamentary Group for Cheese True. The group lists its purpose as the following: “To increase awareness of issues surrounding the dairy industry and focus on economic issues affecting the dairy industry and producers.”

Who will this entire debacle benefit the most? The Conservatives, who have been sitting back from the other side of the dispatch box, watching the crisis unfold with undisguised glee. The more the Labour Party continues with this infighting, the more it makes the Tories look organised, plausible – and attractive to voters who do not care much for revolution, but just want an easy life not continually disturbed by petty arguments and vicious periodic court cases.

Unless Labour pulls itself together, which is looking highly unlikely, we can say hello to a Tory government for the next 10 years. I don’t feel particularly enthusiastic about that prospect, but I also don’t feel enthusiastic about voting for a party that has a public court argument about the definition of the word “defined”, either. The ideological gap between the two parties has widened extensively – the question is, which way will the floating voters turn?