
When I visited Whitemoor prison in the immediate aftermath of the IRA breakout from its supposedly impregnable special secure unit in 1995, one prison officer forlornly observed: “They were just taking the piss weren’t they.”
The group of five IRA men and one London armed robber involved in the breakout had alternately intimidated and then groomed the small staff of the “jail within a jail”, to the point where they were not only having lobster takeaways delivered to the special unit but guns and even Semtex.
The official inquiry by Sir John Learmont following the escape was the last time the proposal was made of a single “supermax” security prison to house all the most dangerous prisoners in England and Wales.




France began isolating Islamic extremists in jails after Paris attacks




The proposal for a British Alcatraz was put on the backburner by the then home secretary, Michael Howard, after being told it would be far too expensive and any escape too embarrassing to manage. The idea was however revived when the last justice secretary, Michael Gove, asked the former prison governor and Home Office official, Ian Acheson, to take a look at the alleged lack of strategy to tackle the problem of Islamist extremism within prisons in England and Wales.




 

The new approach will only work if 'extremist prisoners' are not simply moved to isolation units and forgotten




 

The resulting plan – for a network of separate isolation units for Islamist extremists in existing high-security prisons – is without doubt a major departure from the 50-year-old policy of dispersing convicted terrorists throughout the general population of the high-security estate.
But it feels like a half-hearted departure, and one which is further watered down by the disclosure by the justice secretary, Liz Truss, that the most troublesome of Islamist extremist prisoners will be “ghosted” or moved around the new special isolation units if they show signs of attempting to collaborate or plot together.
Acheson has admitted that the debate between concentration and dispersal was the most difficult question that his review team had to address.
Those who backed a policy of greater concentration argued that dispersal only worked in jails because IRA prisoners did not attempt to recruit or radicalise the rest of the prison population in England and Wales, who they saw as unreliable and ill-disciplined. It was different a story however in Northern Ireland, where both loyalist and republican prisoners built up entire operational command and control networks in the Maze and Maghaberry jails.
Those who back concentration argue that the new generation of convicted terrorist prisoners, of which 137 out of 147 are self-identified as Islamist, pose a different threat to the IRA. They claim that the proselytising activities of some extremists, including preachers such as the recently convicted Anjem Choudray, will find fertile ground amid a growing Muslim youth gang culture in jails which have up to 20% Muslim population. David Cameron has claimed that there were as many as 1,000 current prisoners who are “at risk of radicalisation”.
But as counter-extremism expert, Prof Peter Neumann, has pointed out: “The trade-off is this: you want to separate terrorist prisoners in order to prevent them from radicalising others, yet you don’t want to create a focal point for public protests – a ‘British Guantanamo’, however much of a misrepresentation that might be – or provide an opportunity for terrorist prisoners to create (or recreate) operational command structures inside prison that might not have existed outside.”
“The second point is now more important than ever. With large numbers of ‘lone operators’ who may not be particularly ideological and who have failed to join the command and control structures of groups like Isis, the risk of them connecting with ideological and operational leaders while imprisoned is real. In other words, a policy of concentration may inadvertently help to create the kind of hierarchical organisation that the terrorists found it impossible to create outside.”




Extremist inmates to be moved between prisons in 'ghost train' plan




These dangers were acknowledged on Monday by Chris Dean, the prison service’s former head of extremism, who said there were no easy answers, and warned that while a network of special isolation units could be a practical solution to the problem of a small number of proselytising extremists, they could easily become a proxy for Muslim community protests.
The problem for Truss is that the Acheson review, which was set up by Gove (who has form on the question of the risk of Islamist radicalisation), is thin on evidence on the scale of the problem inside prisons. Only a short 18-page summary of his classified report has been published, and as one prison service insider put it: “I gather they found it very difficult to the evidence of radicalisation.” For example the report admits there is no data on those converting to radical Islam behind bars.
Truss has responded with a slightly fudged solution. No new single supermax prison but a series of isolation units across the six high-security jails. Ending the policy of dispersal but having a “ghost train” system of moving the most troublesome from unit to unit. No new independent prisons’ counter-extremism “tsar”,’ as Acheson recommends, but a new Ministry of Justice directorate to be left in charge.
The new approach will only work if “extremist prisoners” are not simply moved to the isolation units and forgotten. A concerted effort at their deradicalisation has to be made and their release planned for. The omens are not good, as Dean has pointed out that the delivery of an effective approach to preventing terrorist offending in Britain is still in its relative infancy.
The danger is those deemed to be the most dangerous “extremist” prisoners will simply be isolated in a hidden world behind bars, while their alleged treatment and conditions simply provide fuel for campaigns by their supporters outside.

