Since the UK voted to leave the European Union in June, we’ve been trying to untangle why this happened, and what the Brexiteers have in common.

It’s important – and natural – that we want to understand. In fact, a new study on the favourite brands of the British public, divided into those who voted in and out of the EU, has lent us some surprisingly valuable insight.

The number one favourite brand of Leave voters was HP Sauce, followed by Bisto, ITV News, the Health Lottery, Birdseye and Iceland. Their top 10 also included PG Tips and Richmond sausages.

For Remainers, they favoured the BBC website, followed by BBC iPlayer, Instagram and the London Underground. The list also included Airbnb, LinkedIn, Virgin Trains and EasyJet.

There’s no denying that certain brands are affiliated with particular social classes. Those who prefer home-cooked meals and a strong cuppa, rather than spontaneous weekends away, are more likely to be working class for the simple reason that these cost less money.

We know that working class voters disproportionately voted to leave the EU. Despite some arguing that class wasn’t the leading factor, this study backs up the data we’re reluctant to take at face value.

Some say Brexit was a result of racism, a rejection of multiculturalism. This is hard to ignore in light of the increase in hate crime following the vote. But behind the racist violence of a small minority of people – and the creeping xenophobia of many more – is a background of discontent.

We all saw the voxpops leading up to the vote, almost always taken from deprived, working class areas, featuring people saying they would Brexit because they wanted to “take back control”. That £350m saved every week will go on the NHS, they said, as if the EU was the reason for rich getting richer and poor getting poorer. And who could blame them for thinking that? It was repeated again and again by campaigners like Nigel Farage and Boris Johnson.

The working class was painted a picture of their jobs, public services and housing being taken away from them, the rightful beneficiaries, by too many people coming to this country to scrounge. The Brexit vote was a territorial move, fuelled by discontent, to “get our country back”. And we were all lied to.

The Leave campaign was led by a man who said his annual salary of £250,000 for a weekly column in The Telegraph was “chicken feed”. We were so desperate to vote against the establishment that we fell for Johnson, Farage and their anti-establishment lies, when they are both establishment to the bone.

The most scaremongering arguments for Brexit







7 show all The most scaremongering arguments for Brexit











1/7 22 May 2015 In his regular column in The Express Nigel Farage utilised the concerns over Putin and the EU to deliver a tongue in cheek conclusion. “With friends like these, who needs enemies?” PA

2/7 13 November 2015 UKIP MEP for Yorkshire and North Lincolnshire Mike Hookem, was one of several political figures who took no time to harness the toxic atmosphere just moments after Paris attacks to push an agenda. “Cameron says we’re safer in the EU. Well I’m in the centre of the EU and it doesn’t feel very safe.” Getty Images

3/7 19 April 2016 In an article written for The Guardian, Michael Gove attempts to bolster his argument with a highly charged metaphor in which he likens UK remaining in the EU to a hostage situation. “We’re voting to be hostages locked in the back of the car and driven headlong towards deeper EU integration.” Rex

4/7 26 April 2016 In a move that is hard to decipher, let alone understand, Mike Hookem stuck it to Obama re-tweeting a UKIP advertisement that utilises a quote from the film: ‘Love Actually’ to dishonour the US stance on the EU. “A friend who bullies us is no longer a friend”

5/7 10 May 2016 During a speech in London former work and pensions secretary Ian Duncan Smith said that EU migration would cause an increasing divide between people who benefit from immigration and people who couldn’t not find work because of uncontrolled migration. “The European Union is a ‘force for social injustice’ which backs the ‘haves rather than the have-nots.” EPA

6/7 15 May 2016 Cartoon character Boris Johnson made the news again over controversial comments that the EU had the same goal as Hitler in trying to create a political super state. “Napoleon, Hitler, various people tried this out, and it ends tragically.” “The EU is an attempt to do this by different methods.” PA

7/7 16 May 2016 During a tour of the women’s clothing manufacturer David Nieper, Boris had ample time to cook up a new metaphor, arguably eclipsing Gove’s in which he compares the EU to ‘badly designed undergarments.’ “So I just say to all those who prophecy doom and gloom for the British Business, I say their pants are on fire. Let’s say knickers to the pessimists, knickers to all those who talk Britain down.” Getty Images

If we were a land of plenty, we wouldn’t mind immigration to the UK. But in unnecessarily austere times, we must ask ourselves where at least some of the anti-migrant sentiment stemmed from.

Working class Brexiteers have been harder hit by austerity measures than wealthier cosmopolitan Remainers. Former chancellor George Osborne cut billions from welfare, health and education. His policies disproportionally hit disadvantaged children. People saw their families’ lives and lifestyles rapidly decline.

The last government’s policies led to increase in the use of food banks. It changed the definition of child poverty from relative income to include measures such as employment, failing to understand that an increasing number of the poor work. It introduced the Bedroom Tax and changes to welfare payments so harsh that Iain Duncan Smith resigned from cabinet.

The government cut frontline services with one hand, and gave tax cuts to the rich with the other. The discontent this fuelled was used to persuade us that the problem was EU bureaucrats and immigration.

Members of the working class – the ones disproportionately affected by job insecurity, zero hours contracts and public sector pay freezes – were asked to believe that these austerity measures were down to the EU, when leaving it will no doubt affect our economy negatively for years to come.

Now, new prime minister Theresa May, who sailed into number 10 with promises to improve social mobility, is considering lifting a ban on new grammar schools. Less than three per cent of entrants to grammar schools qualify for free school meals. The future for the poorest in our society looks increasingly grim.

It’s no coincidence Brexiteers love the lottery, but unfortunately this was a gamble they’re not likely to win.