
On the Croatian-Serbian border last September, I met a Syrian biomedical engineer called Mohammad who was trying to get to Germany. He’d been beaten to it by his pet dog. The dog, Mohammad said, had a pet passport that allowed him to fly to Berlin. Mohammad himself had a human passport that had only let him get as far as Turkey.
I thought of Mohammad’s absurd situation when Jean-Claude Juncker, the EU’s most senior official, said this week: “Borders are the worst invention ever made by politicians.” Predictably, his throwaway line – made at a conference in Austria this week – sparked fury among Europe’s nationalists. If any proud patriot still needed proof that the EU seeks to create a totalitarian super-state, this was it. “Beyond parody,” said a Ukip spokesman. “Madness,” summarised the Daily Express. 
If Juncker had stopped at “borders are the worst”, perhaps he could have mitigated some of the damage. While he would still have rejected one of nationalism’s most central concepts – the boundary between two sovereign states – at least he wouldn’t have questioned the reality of the border itself. But by calling it an “invention”, Juncker went a step further. Borders in his view are not just bad. They are fictitious.




 

When I crossed the Croatian-Serbian border last year, there was nothing to mark where Serbia stopped and Croatia started




 

For this oddly timed intervention, Juncker has been presented as a renegade. But his argument is in fact an old one. Anthropologists and historians of a certain political disposition have long maintained that borders and nationhood are relatively new constructs. In his book, Imagined Communities, Benedict Anderson argues that the concept of a nation developed only after the invention of the printing press in the 15th century. Printed material led to a standardisation of language, Anderson writes, and encouraged readers to see themselves as part of a common national culture.
Some scholars argue that the contemporary concept of nations constrained by borders began to crystallise only in 1648. It was then that Europe’s major powers agreed to end the thirty years’ war by signing the peace of Westphalia – an agreement that saw the signatories agree to respect each others’ territorial sovereignty, a new concept that has become known as the Westphalian system. 








  

Thousands of migrants across the border between Croatia into Slovenia. Photograph: Jeff J Mitchell/Getty Images


Even then, as William Maley writes in his new book, What is a Refugee?, “Borders except as formalistic markers of jurisdiction typically did not register prominently in the thinking of princes, not least because until the advent of modern systems of regulatory bureaucracy, rigorous border control was simply beyond the capacity of rulers.” According to the deal, Maley continues, Europeans could still migrate from place to place. 
Tellingly, it would be centuries before the creation of many of the countries we now consider as immutable concepts. Germany and Italy only became united entities in the second half of the 19th century. Hungary, now one of Europe’s keenest proponents of border protection, was less than a century ago part of a polyglot, multinational commonwealth, the Austro-Hungarian empire. Poland sits roughly 100 miles west of where it did 70 years ago. If an American says her ancestors are Polish, there’s every chance they were born in what is now Lithuania. Meanwhile, one of the creators of the Westphalian system – the Holy Roman empire – ironically no longer exists.




Britain is still failing child refugees in Europe. We must help them – and fast | Alf Dubs




Even today, borders often exist only as a concept, rather than the robust entities that politicians present them as. When I crossed the Croatian-Serbian border last autumn, a few hours before Mohammad the biomedical engineer, there was nothing that marked where Serbia stopped and Croatia started. On either side, there were identical fields of stubble. It was only when I looked on my GPS map – and saw how the blue dot showing my position had moved west of a slim black line – that I realised I’d crossed into Croatia.
Many borders also exist only in certain contexts – blocking the passage of people but not things. The majority of humans – or at least those of us born in the developing world – cannot legally cross most borders. But all of us can circumvent those same barriers by sending products, money, information, insults, emails, photographs, and ideas to almost any country on the planet.
Are borders “the worst”? That’s a subjective debate. But objectively speaking, borders are definitely an invention. If they weren’t, Mohammad’s dog wouldn’t have beaten him to Germany.

