By far the most remarkable thing about last night’s Labour leadership hustings was just how far to the left politics inside the party has shifted. Whatever happens next, Jeremy Corbyn can be credited with having transforming Labour, putting into the mainstream ideas that until recently were laughed out of town – only, apparently, to be taken up by opponents in this election.

This time last year, Labour was emerging from an election in which it touted the infamous “tough controls on immigration” mug and then abstained on the welfare bill. Last night, Owen Smith was falling over himself to back Corbyn’s stance on tax justice and austerity. Had it not been for the baying of the crowd, it could have been recorded coverage from the “I agree with Nick” general election TV debate in 2010.

The shift goes further than the party’s internal debates. As leader of the opposition, Corbyn has given voice to a public sentiment which is well to the left of centre on taxation, public ownership and investment, and chipped away at the austerity consensus.

What almost everyone would concede is that, beyond the big narrative of austerity, Labour has not always had the clearest of messaging in the minds of many voters. You can argue over the causes – maybe it’s incompetence, or maybe it’s the fact that the message has become corrupted by actions of the Parliamentary Labour Party and reporting in the right-wing media – but the fact of it is undeniable. In fact, polls consistently show that clarity of message is one of Corbyn’s biggest problems.

So in many ways, the most significant thing to happen this week was not the Labour leadership hustings – which was mainly a showcase of Owen Smith’s intention to swerve wildly to the left while repeatedly stating that he likes winning elections – but Jeremy Corbyn’s announcement of ten key pledges “to rebuild and transform Britain”. The pledges provide the foundations of a comprehensive policy platform for Labour at the next election.

At the core of Corbyn’s pledges is a plan to rejuvenate “left behind” communities and address the crisis in jobs and housing. The plan is to use a £500bn National Investment Bank to pump a huge stimulus into the economy and invest in infrastructure – and to distribute the social dividend to communities that need it, not to the private sector. A million new homes and a million new jobs are not just what is needed by many people – they are clear, quantified core messages that can be repeated and repeated.

The most ridiculous claims made about Jeremy Corbyn







11 show all The most ridiculous claims made about Jeremy Corbyn



















1/11 He called Hezbollah and Hamas ‘friends’ True. In a speech made to the Stop the War Coalition in 2009, Mr Corbyn called representatives from both groups “friends” after inviting them to Parliament. He later told Channel 4 he wanted both groups, who have factions designated as international terror organisations, to be “part of the debate” for the Middle East peace process. “I use (the word ‘friends’) in a collective way, saying our friends are prepared to talk,” he added. “Does it mean I agree with Hamas and what it does? No. Does it mean I agree with Hezbollah and what they do? No.” Reuters

2/11 ‘Jeremy Corbyn thinks the death of Osama bin Laden was a tragedy’ Partly false. David Cameron used this as a line of attack at the Conservative Party conference but appears to have left out all context from Mr Corbyn’s original remarks. In an 2011 interview on Iranian television, the then-backbencher said the fact the al-Qaeda leader was not put on trial was the tragedy, continuing: “The World Trade Center was a tragedy, the attack on Afghanistan was a tragedy, the war in Iraq was a tragedy.”

3/11 He is ‘haunted’ by the legacy of his ‘evil’ great-great-grandfather False. A Daily Express exposé revealed that the Labour leader’s ancestor, James Sargent, was the “despotic” master of a Victorian workhouse. Addressing the report at the Labour conference, Mr Corbyn said he had never heard of him before, adding: “I want to take this opportunity to apologise for not doing the decent thing and going back in time and having a chat with him about his appalling behaviour.”

4/11 Jeremy Corbyn raised a motion about ‘pigeon bombs’ in Parliament This one is true. On 21 May 2004, Mr Corbyn raised an early day motion entitled “pigeon bombs”, proposing that the House register being “appalled but barely surprised” that MI5 reportedly proposed to load pigeons with explosives as a weapon. The motion continued: “The House… believes that humans represent the most obscene, perverted, cruel, uncivilised and lethal species ever to inhabit the planet and looks forward to the day when the inevitable asteroid slams into the earth and wipes them out thus giving nature the opportunity to start again.” It was not carried.

5/11 He rides a Communist bicycle False. A report in The Times referred to Mr Corbyn, known for his cycling, riding a “Chairman Mao-style bicycle” earlier this year. “Less thorough journalists might have referred to it as just a bicycle, but no, so we have to conclude that whenever we see somebody on a bicycle from now on, there goes another supporter of Chairman Mao,” he later joked.

6/11 'Jeremy Corbyn will appoint a special minister for Jews' False so far. The Sun report in December was allegedly based on a “rumour” passed to the paper by a Daily Express columnist who has written pieces critical of the Labour leader in the past. The minister did not materialise in his shadow cabinet.

7/11 ‘Jeremy Corbyn wishes Britain would abolish its Army’ False. Another gem from The Sun took comments made at a Hiroshima remembrance parade in August 2012 where Mr Corbyn supported Costa Rica’s move to abolish it armed forces. “Wouldn’t it be wonderful if every politician around the world…abolished the army and took pride in the fact that they don’t have an army,” he added. The caveat that “every politician” must take the step suggests Mr Corbyn does not support UK disarmament just yet.

8/11 Jeremy Corbyn stole sandwiches meant for veterans False. The Guido Fawkes blog claimed that the Labour leader took sandwiches meant for veterans at at Battle of Britain memorial service in September but a photo later emerged showing him being handed one by Costa volunteers, who later confirmed they were given to all guests.

9/11 He missed the induction into the Queen’s privy council True. After much speculation about Mr Corbyn’s republican views and willingness to bow to the monarch, his office confirmed that he did not attend the official induction to the privy council because of a prior engagement, but did not rule out joining the body.

10/11 Jeremy Corbyn refuses to sing the national anthem. Partly true. The Labour leader was filmed standing in silence as God Save the Queen was sung at a Battle of Britain remembrance service but will reportedly sing it in future. Mr Corbyn was elusive on the issue in an interview, saying he would show memorials “respect in the proper way”, but sources said he would sing the anthem at future occasions.

11/11 He is a member of the All-Party Parliamentary Group for Cheese True. The group lists its purpose as the following: “To increase awareness of issues surrounding the dairy industry and focus on economic issues affecting the dairy industry and producers.”

Jobs, housing and investment are hardly new ideas – but it is above all a high tech, high skill economy that Corbyn is offering to create. Similarly, the National Education Service incorporates familiar demands from within the Labour movement, like the abolition of tuition fees, but then goes much further – breaking down the barriers between traditional education, vocational training and lifelong learning. This is culture-changing stuff.

Crucially for the dynamics of the campaign, the ten pledges are significantly to the left of anything that Owen Smith could plausibly offer. Smith promises to repeal the Trade Union Act, but Corbyn promises to repeal far more, and to introduce mandatory collective bargaining for large firms. Smith pledges to build houses, but Corbyn pledges to build half a million council houses. Smith says he wants to end austerity, but Corbyn now has a programme to do much more than that.

Above all the noise of the leadership hustings, this could well be the moment that Jeremy Corbyn’s vision became a serious plan.