
A ruthless gerrymandering of British democracy to favour the partisan interests of the Conservative party: that’s what the new electoral boundary proposals amount to.
Slashing the number of MPs from 650 to 600 given our growing population is, at the outset, “daft”, as Labour’s Chris Bryant puts it. It will make it that little bit harder for already overburdened MPs to deal with their constituents’ issues, particularly in inner-city communities with complex social problems (which tend, of course, to be represented by Labour MPs). That the Tories cut the elected chamber while packing its unelected neighbour is a damning indictment. But the rest of the Tory case is superficially appealing: there is a need to address Labour’s inbuilt advantage, and ensure that each constituency contains a roughly equally sized population. The reality is rather different – and that’s an understatement.




Boundary changes are designed to hurt us at next election, says Labour MP




Firstly, Labour’s inbuilt advantage evaporated at the last election along with 40 of the party’s seats in Scotland. While the Tories won a seat for every 34,244 voters who opted for the Conservatives, it took an average of 40,290 to win a Labour seat last year.
But it’s the way the proposed new constituencies have been created that is so egregious. The seats are not to be designed on the basis of how many people live in them, but rather on the basis of last December’s electoral register.
A new system of individual registration meant hundreds of thousands of people were wiped from the register. Disproportionately, they tended to be young, private tenants and from black and minority ethnic backgrounds. Who are they more likely to vote for? Not the Conservatives, that’s for sure. Because of the referendum effect, another 2 million people have joined the electoral register since. But the new seats do not take them into account. According to Labour’s Jonathan Ashworth, the new Lewisham constituencies will be based on an electoral register missing 20% of their voters, for example.




Boundary review: Corbyn says inner-city seat shouldn't be enlarged - Politics live




Creating constituencies with roughly similar sized populations is a laudable aim. That’s not what this package does. Its main achievement is to skew the electoral map even further in favour of the Conservatives.
Combined with other assaults on democracy – from legislation to cripple trade unions to a so-called “gagging bill” which intends to silence NGOs – and the picture is clear. Even when Labour pulls itself together and is in a position to effectively challenge the Conservatives, everything will be stacked in favour of the ruling party.
Our ancestors fought for our democratic rights and freedoms. It would be an insult to this great British tradition if we now remained silent while a political party stitched up the rules in an attempt to keep itself in power forever.

