
God, it would be awful to be a politician. Think of it. You’re Stephen Byers, putting forward proposals for rote learning in schools as part of your brief as education secretary, and some toerag radio presenter asks you seven times eight, and you say 54, and 18 years later that’s probably the only reason anyone remembers you. You’re Zac Goldsmith, and all you want is to save London from the beastly Sadiq Khan, and you get ripped to shreds just because you can’t remember which stop comes after Tottenham Court Road on the Central line. Or you’re Emily Thornberry, shadow foreign secretary, and you don’t know who the French foreign minister is, and all hell suddenly breaks loose.




Emily Thornberry accuses Sky presenter Murnaghan of sexism




Is it important that Thornberry should know, off the top of her head, who the French foreign minister is – or, for that matter, the answer to Dermot Murnaghan’s next question, the name of the president of South Korea? I don’t know.
On the one hand, she’ll obviously be given the relevant information before she meets either party, and since she is unlikely to ever be in government anyway, the question is more or less moot. On the other hand, she had just tried to sound authoritative by volunteering her plans to visit her French counterpart, and you might imagine that in the process of agreeing such a plan his identity (Jean-Marc Ayrault, but you knew that already) might have arisen.
It’s certainly fairer game than the other style of political gotcha query, the pint-of-milk test (no idea because I hate hot drinks and cereal, but a Diet Coke is 60p at the corner shop, if that’s any use to you), which supposedly has all ministers swotting up furiously on briefing documents of “ordinary person” information any time they’re going on the air. They plainly aren’t ordinary people, and anyone who manages to be one when wrestling with a ministerial red box probably isn’t doing their job properly. Regardless, this style of questioning certainly isn’t, as Thornberry claimed, sexist. Gleeful television presenters have been setting these heffalump traps for ministers since time immemorial.








  

‘Put this next to that whole idiotic business about tweeting a picture of a house with England flags hanging from the front window.’ Photograph: @EmilyThornberry/PA


Maybe it’s all daft. And yet trivia is not always entirely trivial. The problem with Thornberry’s response was not her ignorance but the way in which she dealt with it; by accusing Murnaghan of sexism instead of good-humouredly batting the question away with a joke about having misplaced her cheat sheet, or something, she made it significantly more interesting, and instantly multiplied its shelf life as a story on a quiet Sunday morning. Put this next to that whole idiotic business about tweeting a picture of a house with England flags hanging from the front window and you begin to wonder whether this is a politician whose propensity for unforced PR errors is getting in the way of doing her job effectively.
Something similar applies to the (infinitely more serious) matter of the political scandal, as per Keith Vaz’s recent alleged indiscretions. It’s not that I think I have the slightest right to know about his private life, or sense that a predilection for escorts will affect his ability to do his job per se; I just have questions about the judgment and reliability of anyone incapable of exercising self-control when the chances of getting caught are so high, and the consequences so catastrophic. If you can’t survive this nonsense, how well can we possibly expect you to handle the important stuff?
Even so. Cock-up though it was, I feel extremely sorry for Thornberry, and all politicians, this morning. Imagine it: walking down the street, on your way to buy a pint of the proverbial, in the certain knowledge that at any moment some twerp with a smartphone could stick his camera in your face and demand to know the name of your favourite Adele song, or the capital of Slovakia. At risk, everywhere, all the time. I’d never leave the house.

