
After each new shooting or stabbing of strangers by a loner male or small group in the west, Islamic State often claims responsibility; sometimes if the assailant survives he’ll make similar admissions.
In the recent Bastille Day atrocity and the killing of an elderly priest in France, disturbing media reports complete with graphic images created a sense of increasing – and ever more sickening acts – of violence. Concerned that media reports may be fuelling the violence, sections of the French media self-imposed a ban on reporting verbal and visual details of the perpetrators and their heinous actions. 
There are good reasons why this move should act as a catalyst for the drafting of a global code on media reporting of violence.




French media to stop publishing photos and names of terrorists




The expression of anger is heavily gendered; men lash out and women hurt themselves. The killing of strangers is very much a male preserve. In the classic Hollywood gangster film White Heat, Cody (James Cagney) cries out “On top of the world Ma!” as he exits in a blaze of glory by blowing himself up atop a gas storage tank while shooting at the police below; nowadays referred to as “suicide by cop”. 
The term is used most often to describe a youngish man who decides to end his life by staging a siege situation hoping to be shot, occasionally with hostages and a desire that others also die with him. Typically he will have a history of criminal behaviour and the final act is often fuelled by intoxication and triggered by a significant loss, often that of an intimate relationship. Commonly these men are narcissistic and the more they feel neglected, rejected or opposed, the greater their desire for attention. 
What better way to sear one’s presence into the mind of others than by the dramatic violent taking of lives, especially if it can be emblazoned in the news? News that now has global reach.
These events often happen at a particular time of life – early adulthood, which coincides with transitioning from dependence on the family to a stable interdependence with the wider society. During the transition period identifications are intense, fluid and formed by associations to like-minded peers.
Neuroscience has also shown that the brain of a young adult continues developing well into the twenties and higher mental functions responsible for impulse control and long term consequential judgment are the last to mature. Delayed maturation is particularly evident in men, and correlated with egocentricity and antisocial attitudes.
Not surprisingly then, disaffected and confused young males will see detailed, graphic and protracted global reporting of others with whom they identify and find justification for emulation alongside an opportunity for attachment to a group that would amplify the significance of their behaviour. There may even be a wish to “better” the latest atrocity in a perverse competition to be the biggest badass. Indeed what may initially have otherwise been a more limited and impulsive intention may be elaborated into something grander.
Contrary to sensationalist headlines severe mental illness is uncommon. Hence the astonishment displayed at the attackers behaviour by family and neighbours.
Counter opinions from others in the media to restrictions on reporting have argued that for such men, it is social media that matters and so news outlets have little impact on their decisions. This is to miss the point that their wish is be noticed not so much by their fellow fringe dwellers but by the mainstream they feel is responsible for not seeing their true worth. Having the law-abiding and the powerful cringe and quake in response to reports in which their personal details are endlessly pored over is the Holy Grail. Besides, even social media relies heavily on news reports.
Research from the 1960s onwards established a link between detailed personal reports of suicide and subsequent suicide by others who found misjudged validation from the publicised account. It was dubbed the Werther effect (named after copycat suicides by young men following the publication in 1774 of Goethe’s The Sorrows of Young Werther). Acceptance by responsible media organisations of the findings has led to a growth in guidelines in many countries curbing detailed accounts of a personal nature regarding suicide.
Similar findings are now emerging in relation to acts of public violence. The right for the public to read lurid details of little direct relevance and with a potential to cause loss of life is hard to justify.
None of this is to discount that social, economic and ideological influences are important and must be vigorously confronted. However our most potent influence are others and our relationships with them, perhaps even more so when it is imagined rather than real and lends itself to a romantic idealised experience. They shape our identity and our state of mind. In the end any act is the product of that mind.
The male brain in early adulthood has yet to attain full maturation and struggles to curb impulses, delay gratification and exercise judgment over the emotions. Allied to the brain’s deficient self-control is the major psychological challenge of developing a satisfactory self-identity that allows, as Freud said, the goals of a mature person in society to love and to work; to feel a sense of meaning, purpose and belonging. 




French media’s blackout on terrorists’ identities is missing the point | Jason Burke




Before this final stage is realised, the identity is in flux and inclined towards its need to discover itself. In this limbo state the young person craves safety and shelter through intense identification and attachment to like-minded peers. 
For certain young men this will be to others who mirror their sense of a real or imagined rejection by the more powerful mainstream. Bonded by a deep sense of being outcasts, resentment becomes their emotional currency and revenge the method of seeking to lash out and be noticed. At this point – for the ones teetering on the edge – emulating others who achieve this aim in the most dramatic manner and on the largest stage is the final validation, and how the media chooses to portray violent actors takes on special significance.
The French media that have chosen restraint over the right to report every gratuitous detail highlight this mental vulnerability to contagion. The rest of the media needs to take note and respond in kind.

