The publication by the Guardian of a remarkable cache of documents from the Australian-funded refugee detention camp on the Pacific island of Nauru may prove a crucial moment in undermining the credibility of a policy of incarceration which bodies such as Amnesty International, Human Rights Watch, and the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees have long denounced for its meanness and cruelty.

With rare exceptions, the documents paint a searing picture of the collapse of basic humanity, a Lord of the Flies scenario of which any liberal democracy should be utterly ashamed. No Australian politicians or bureaucrats responsible for Nauru will now be able to plead ignorance if one day they are held to account before a royal commission or similar investigative tribunal.

Peter Dutton attacks Guardian and ABC over reporting of Nauru files Read more

It has taken a long time to reach this point. The use of Nauru as a dumping ground for refugees originated in 2001, following the so-called Tampa affair, in which the then Australian government, under then-prime minister John Howard, despatched commandos to board a Norwegian vessel that had rescued asylum seekers from a foundering boat in the Indian Ocean.

The aim of the mission was not to aid the captain of the MV Tampa (who, with his crew, later received the UNHCR’s highest honour, the Nansen Medal), let alone those he had rescued, but to prevent the asylum seekers from disembarking on Australian soil. The reason was that the Howard government felt increasingly threatened by a far-right political grouping, the One Nation party led by Pauline Hanson, and saw a policy of hostility to refugees – a kind of “soft Hansonism” – as a way of recovering rightwing support.

At this point, Nauru entered the picture. A failed Pacific microstate with an avaricious and unscrupulous leadership – Nauru in the late 1990s reportedly laundered more than US$70bn for the Russian mafia – it was the perfect partner for an Australian refugee dumping exercise.

To nurture an arrangement for this to happen, Australia agreed to provide over A$1m to pay the unpaid debts owed by Nauruans to Australian hospitals, as blatant a bribe as one could imagine. And since then, Nauru has done very well as Australia’s new friend. In the May 2015 Australian budget, Nauru, with an Australian detention centre, was slated to receive aid funding amounting to $2,120.00 per person per year in aid. By contrast, Afghanistan was slated to receive A$2.63 per person per year in aid.

What made Nauru such a ideal partner? Two factors essentially came into play. The first was Nauru’s nominal status as a “sovereign state”. While Nauru in practice is best described as a “mendicant” or even “prostitute” state, its formal status has allowed Australia to put forward the legal fiction that the treatment of refugees on Nauru is a matter for Nauru, not Australia. This, of course, is pure fiction: the reality is that Australia pays the bills, and contractors to the Australian Department of Immigration and Border Protection act as “service” providers.

The other factor favouring Nauru is that accountability mechanisms can be avoided. Those on Nauru are beyond any protective jurisdiction of independent Australian courts, or the investigative capacity of the Australian Human Rights Commission. Even the media are constrained: potentially-critical journalists do not receive visas, and just to be on the safe side, Nauru imposes a non-refundable $8,000 visa fee for media applicants.

It goes almost without saying that in Nauru itself, there are no independent sources of protection for refugees. Police investigations of complaints, even of serious crimes, are virtually non-existent, and the rule of law collapsed when the Melbourne-based chief justice was refused a visa to return, and the chief magistrate was deported from the country.

The Nauru files: cache of 2,000 leaked reports reveal scale of abuse of children in Australian offshore detention Read more

It may be that even as devastating a collection of materials as the Nauru files will do little to shift current Australian policy. The present prime minister, Malcolm Turnbull, once seen as a moderate, was returned to office in the 2 July 2016 election with only 76 seats out of 150 in the House of Representatives. He is very much beholden to the right wing of his own Liberal party, including his Peter Dutton, his ultra-conservative minister for immigration and border protection.

He may also feel dependent on Hanson, who through a quirk of the electoral system secured election to the Senate, along with three of her followers. In addition, he is hostage to his repeated claims that the harsh regime on Nauru is necessary to stop refugees from risking their lives by boarding boats – although deterrence without attention to root causes of movement does not save lives but simply shifts deaths to other parts of the world. (And we know from Wikileaks that when he was opposition leader in 2009, one of his key strategists told the US Embassy that the issue of boats was “fantastic” and “the more boats that come the better” because of the political embarrassment it caused the Labor government).

Yet he may also care for his historical reputation. History tends to be unkind to those who embrace the evil practices of those they once denounced. Here, Turnbull would be well advised to recall the damning last sentence of George Orwell’s Animal Farm: “The creatures outside looked from pig to man, and from man to pig, and from pig to man again; but already it was impossible to say which was which.”

William Maley is a professor of diplomacy at the Australian National University, and author of What is a Refugee?