The High Pay Centre’s annual examination of the pay of chief executives of FTSE 100 companies, published on Monday, is a model of consistency. It consistently shows an increase, and it generally also shows a rise in the multiplier that illustrates the gap between the average employee’s pay package and the CEO’s. Last year, 2015, the biggest pay packet in the company was on average 129 times bigger than the average employee’s. But less than 20 years ago, it was a mere 47 times. The cast list may change, but the trajectory of the pay of the tiny elite of turbo-capitalists is up, and ever up.

People outside this platinum circle – the Institute of Directors, shareholders, financial commentators and now the prime minister herself– warn that this cannot go on. There are straws in the wind, particularly from the US, suggesting change is on its way. But it will take the kind of determination and political will to challenge big business that has been conspicuously absent since the early 2000s.

Apologists for the FTSE 100 bosses say that they are a tiny number, a small elite whose talents are so irreplaceable that their value can only be measured in global terms. That’s the view from the top. But they are bosses of companies listed in London, British businesses. The criticism does not only come from the left and it is not only linked to the sheer vastness of their pay packages. It is also of the opaque nature of their connection to the long-term performance of their company or to the prosperity of the rest of the workforce. So, for most employees, pay rose around 2% last year, and is only just back to 2008 levels, while bosses in, say, banking, are getting year-on-year increases of up to 7%. Sir Martin Sorrell’s £70m deal, reflecting, it was said, the performance of shares in his advertising firm, WPP, was unprecedented (although it is his second year at the top of the highest-paid FTSE 100 CEOs). As well as advertising, the top slots for 2015 are filled by pharmaceuticals, housing and Sky TV. What these men – all men – earn in the first week of January is usually more than their average employee will earn in the rest of the year.

UK's top bosses received 10% pay rise in 2015 as average salary hit £5.5m Read more

This year, shows of resistance have been mounting, exceeding those of the so-called shareholder spring in 2012. In April, 60% of shareholders revolted against a £14m package for the BP chief executive Bob Dudley, an award made after record losses and thousands of job losses. On the same day, there was a shareholder revolt at Smith & Nephew. More followed, against the estate agents Foxtons, Shire pharmaceuticals and Weir engineers. Last month, days after Theresa May had made curbing pay part of her leadership pitch, the consultants PwC reported research showing widespread resentment of executive pay. “It’s a major source of distrust,” they said, warning that the general public would be furious if they were aware of the real level of chief executive pay relative to their workers’. At one shareholder meeting, the Church of England called it “immoral”. No one claims that it is effective, either in rewarding or improving performance. Because of its attention to share price rather than, say, the long-term future of the company, it probably contributes to the productivity gap that bedevils industry. It has a tone-deaf disregard for the views of ordinary people that fuels mistrust and resentment to damaging levels.

Can Theresa May get the wheels of British business turning again? Read more

So if she really means what she said in her Birmingham speech when she questioned the link between a flatlining FTSE and the trebling of executive pay over the past 18 years, Mrs May will find the door already ajar. In that speech, made only hours before she became prime-minister-in-waiting, she presented some bold proposals: making shareholder votes binding, introducing transparency about bonus objectives, compelling publication of the ratio between bosses’ pay and the workers’ – all these would be widely welcomed as steps in the direction of greater transparency.

But it does not take more evidence to know that the discrepancy between the top and the middle and bottom is plain for all to see. Last month, the Institute for Fiscal Studies published its annual report on living standards, poverty and inequality, which spells it out in diagrams. A steadily rising trajectory for household incomes between 10th and 90th centile suddenly shoots up until it hits a rocket-like vertical between 99th and 100th. The poorest 10% have a weekly household income of £244, the wealthiest 10%, £947. But the top 1% take home nearly £2,500. Pay at the very top needs tackling, but pay at the bottom needs tackling even more.