
This Thursday, thousands of Communication Workers Union members will go on strike from the Post Office in a dispute over job losses, the closure of their pension scheme and the very future of the industry. While the scale of what our members are fighting is stark – with 2,000 job losses this year alone – the truth is that over the past five years they have endured a relentless programme of cuts and closures and the Post Office has become a case study in the limitations of austerity-era thinking.




Do you work for the Post Office? If you plan to strike, tell us why




Showing greater concern for the commercial interests of potential buyers than the future of a public service, the government split the Post Office from Royal Mail in 2012. This kept it in public ownership while the Royal Mail was privatised, fattening up a successful business the government went on to sell at a knockdown price.
While the Post Office faced the challenges of being separated from the profitable mail business, the government also decided to start systematically scaling back the Post Office’s public funding. With no strategy to grow its revenues, the cost-cutting has had predictable results.
Take the flagship Crown post offices as an example. In 2014 there were more than 370 of these branches across the UK in prominent high-street locations. They are the largest offices, with highly trained staff, and are perfectly positioned to make it a major player in banking and other services. But instead of modernisation, we have seen the decimation of this part of the network.




Too many people face unmanageable debt. The cure is trade unions | Owen Jones




By the end of the year the Post Office will have closed down more than 100 of these branches, with more likely to follow. Services have been outsourced to retailers such as WH Smith, which has installed a Post Office counter at the back of some of its stores. For the public this means a significantly worse service and the loss of a community asset – and for staff the impact is equally dire.
These retailers don’t want to match the terms and conditions the Post Office has paid its employees – and the income the Post Office counter offers the retailers wouldn’t cover this even if they did. So the Post Office is using tens of millions of pounds to pay off long-serving staff to leave, so they can be replaced with part-time workers on the minimum wage.
The Post Office points to its profit margin and a reduction in public funding to justify this. But here’s the crux of the issue: having received £2bn from the government over seven years, it’s not unreasonable to expect the board of the company to have come up with more than a glorified closure programme that delivers savings in the short term. Given the uncertainty over the Post Office’s traditional income, it needs to innovate and grow in new areas if it is to have a future.
Indeed, the scaled-back service that is emerging is far from the vision that was presented to the public originally. In 2010 the government pledged to make the Post Office a “genuine front office” for its services to bring in new revenue, but it has never delivered on this pledge. The Post Office’s income from government services today is 40% lower than it was six years ago.
Similarly, we were told that growing revenues from financial services would be essential to the Post Office’s future. Six years on this hasn’t become the case, and the same problems we highlighted then are still holding it back: it has no current account (beyond a long-running pilot scheme), no business account and no children’s account to build a customer base for the future.




Royal Mail's flawed sale bodes badly for the Post Office | Lindsay Mackie




Our members are under no illusions about the wider trends in society and the postal industry that impact upon them. But there is no reason for the UK to have set out to become the world leader in decline in response to these. In 2006 the French government launched La Banque Postale through its post office network. It has a mandate to encourage sustainable development, tackle financial exclusion and promote social and affordable housing. It has strong links with local government, not-for-profits and mutuals – and last year it made a profit of over €1bn.
Meanwhile, our Post Office not only lacks any positive strategy for the future, it is also adopting the worst practices of British business towards its staff. Perhaps taking Philip Green as its inspiration, it is seeking to close part of its pension plan and telling staff the benefits they have built up are at risk. This is despite it being the best-funded scheme in the country and having a surplus of over £130m.
Or perhaps it’s looking to model itself on Sport Direct. Faced with the current industrial dispute, the Post Office is victimising trade union representatives by threatening them with compulsory redundancy and offering staff payments of £3,000 and upwards not to go on strike.
The government must recognise that the Post Office is in urgent need of new thinking. Our members striking this Thursday have a simple demand: we want a pause in the current cuts and a proper series of talks with the government and the Post Office, to formulate a strategy that will safeguard it for the future. The government has talked about having an industrial strategy for this country. It’s time for it to show that it’s serious.

