
Anyone who has seen the horribly fascinating documentary Weiner, about the disgraced New York mayoral candidate and sexting addict Anthony Weiner, will have had an up-close-and-personal look at the real political face of 2017, and maybe even the Democratic presidential candidate of 2024. This is Weiner’s stylish wife, the elegant and cerebral Huma Abedin, who is standing by her idiot of a husband. She is also the most trusted aide of Hillary Rodham Clinton. Abedin’s face in that movie is a picture of suppressed dismay. How on earth does such a classy, contained person handle this kind of rackety farce?




Huma Abedin shuns limelight, but is a compelling protagonist in Weiner film




The question occurred to me again this week as more Clinton emails were released. In 2009, poor Abedin had to deal with a request from the media executive Casey Wasserman, who represents English footballers, lobbying to get a visa for a Wolves player with a criminal record to join his teammates in Las Vegas for a “celebration break”. As this case landed in her lap, Abedin must have been wondering what she had done to deserve it. Her email discloses that the Wolves footballer made her “nervous”. Who can blame her? But as she continues in politics, Abedin will have to deal with an endless parade of unnerving people like this footballer, and Anthony Weiner.
Comedy golds
This week the BBC published its poll of the top 100 films of the 21st century, as voted for by film critics around the world – though sadly not me, as I had returned from holiday to find my invitation to participate nestling in the junk folder. The moment the list was published, my Twitter timeline featured comments from David Baddiel, Edgar Wright and Sam Bain on the scandalous fact that no actual comedy featured on the list. And this doesn’t mean the perennially acceptable seriocomic complexities of the Coen brothers or Wes Anderson – just straight-ahead comedy.
Well, comedies are largely looked down on by critics (though not this one). Is it because we’re a bunch of miserable arthouse nerds? I suspect it’s the opposite: critics all fancy themselves as wits and humorists at certain movies’ expense. Laugh-at is easier than laugh-with. Oh well. I would take this BBC list, boot out Alfonso Cuarón’s Children of Men and Cameron Crowe’s horribly overrated Almost Famous and replace them with Sacha Baron Cohen’s masterpiece Borat and Jemaine Clement and Taika Waititi’s wonderful What We Do in the Shadows. And I want to find a way of inserting Adam McKay’s glorious cop satire The Other Guys, along with Ted. That would be a start.
A bigger splash
The melancholy footnote to this year’s triumphant Olympics comes from the action movie legend Jason Statham. He began his career in the public eye as an athlete, representing England in diving at the 1990 Commonwealth Games in New Zealand, but sadly never at any stage “medalling” – as no one used to say in 1990. Now he has bittersweet emotions about Team GB’s glory.
“It’s a bit of a sore point I never got to the Olympics,” he says. “I just heard they got seven million or something for the diving per year. They deserve it. The divers we’ve got now are just terrific. I started too late. I should have done a different sport.”
Surely not. Greater success in some other event – dressage? – might have led Statham into a disastrous career cul-de-sac. Diving’s loss was a showbusiness’s gain, and Jason is on the long road to national treasure status.

