
Last week’s federal court decision awarding compensation for the extinguishment of native title in the township of Timber Creek in 1994 by the Northern Territory government is an important milestone in the development of our native title laws. It establishes a judicial precedent and a new paradigm for assessing the monetary value of native title in the Australian legal system.
The applicants, the Ngaliwurru and Nungali peoples were opposed by the Northern Territory and the commonwealth.
The lead applicant, Alan Griffiths, a man steeped in Aboriginal law, lives with his wife in a small outstation on the far western edge of the Northern Territory. When I visited them last year, I found them living in a bush bough shade, with no power and limited access to water. It was not my idea of an easy life. But they exuded optimism; they were on “country”, close to important sites, living off the land and visited regularly by family. Access to country remains as important as ever to Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples.




Timber Creek $3m native title payout paves way for billion-dollar liability claims




Justice John Mansfield’s decision in Griffiths v Northern Territory of Australia breaks new ground in a number of areas. It is built on the foundation of the constitutional provision that compulsory acquisition of property by government must be on “just terms”.
The court decision provides not just for financial compensation linked to the freehold value of the land, but importantly also acknowledges that the intangible impacts of dispossession can have seriously adverse impacts on native title holders. Mansfield noted:




 

 The evidence was that for the Ngaliwurru-Nungali Peoples, ancestral spirits, the people, the country, and everything that exists on it, are viewed as organic parts of one indissoluble whole and that the evidence of loss was significant and keenly felt …


Mansfield’s careful and rigorous reasoning makes clear that every case will be different, and will be shaped by local circumstances. His reasoning led him to award $512,000 for the financial loss of non-exclusive possession over 34 lots in the township, and $1.48m in interest for the delay in payment of over 20 years.
In addition, and of most significance for Indigenous interests and policymakers, the court awarded a sum of $1.3m related to the intangible impacts of the dispossession involved in the extinguishment of their native title rights. Academic anthropologists have long recognised that this is a looming policy issue; see for example Diane Smith’s 2001 research paper on “valuing native title”.
Mansfield acknowledges the complexity of the judgment on this issue but demonstrates an impressive grasp of the deep-seated and ongoing nature of the damage done to Indigenous people’s connection to country, to culture, and ultimately to the native title holders’ place in the world as they understand it. In this context, the sum awarded is arguably modest, even paltry.
The policy implications of Mansfield’s decision extend way beyond Timber Creek, and beyond the legal system itself.
The decision’s implications apply primarily to native title which has been extinguished since 1975 and subsequently validated by the Native Title Act. The extent of the areas affected is as yet unknown, but even comparatively small areas may involve very significant valuations where the extinguished tenure was used for urban development.
While the principles established in Griffiths will apply to determined native title, the real impact will be on yet to be claimed and determined native title which has been extinguished since 1975 when the Racial Discrimination Act was enacted. Most claims to date have focused on native title which has not been extinguished. This decision will potentially unleash a further round of claims seeking determinations of native title which has, since 1975, been extinguished.
The decision will reinforce and strengthen a trend for state and territory governments to negotiate settlements with native title claimants outside of litigation in order to avoid potential compensation awards.
The Griffiths decision has strengthened the leverage of Indigenous interests in those future settlement negotiations. The stakes involved for all parties are now considerably larger, and the policy and political arguments in favour of negotiation over litigation have been strengthened.
In addition, federal-state conflict will likely be enlivened over an issue first raised in 1993. The Keating government offered to underwrite 75% of the cost of state and territory compensation costs in an attempt to assuage state concerns over the passage of the commonwealth Native Title Act. In the fevered atmosphere of the times, no state or territory accepted the offer, and 23 years on, it is no longer clear whether the commonwealth is prepared to renew the offer.
Western Australia has negotiated at least two significant financial agreements, the Yawuru native title agreement in Broome and the Noongar settlement in the south west which were clearly aimed at pre-empting the potential for the awards of huge compensation payments arising from the validation of extensive residential development (with significant freehold valuations) on the margins of Perth, Broome and potentially elsewhere since 1975. Similarly in Victoria, the state has established a legislative framework, the Traditional Owner Settlement Act 2010, to encourage regional settlements rather than litigation, and has negotiated one settlement agreement to date.
Technically, there has been no determination of compensation under these settlement agreements, and thus the cost of the negotiated settlements does not come within the terms of the Keating government offer. But the link is there, and the issue will inevitably be enlivened as state and territory governments work through the implications of the Griffiths decision.




Indigenous MPs to meet youth in push for constitutional recognition




Finally, looking to the next 25 years, the commonwealth itself needs to examine carefully its approach to regulating native title. Given the dollars at stake in resource negotiations, and now in potential compensation claims, the shallow regulatory oversight over the native title negotiation space, and the very real risk that native title groups will be short-changed by carpetbagger advisers, the potential for a future high court decision establishing a fiduciary duty on the commonwealth in relation to the allocation of compensation funds arising from the extinguishment of native title cannot be dismissed.
The native title system administered by the courts is mind-numbingly complex, legalistic, extremely slow and cumbersome, and prone to political hyperbole and grandstanding from all quarters. While states such as WA and Victoria have been strategically proactive, other state and federal governments which followed the Keating government have largely failed to make the leaps of imagination and common sense required to bring ordinary justice to native title holders.
The courts, for all their faults, have demonstrated that step by small step, they can span the gap. Mansfield’s decision in Griffiths is a huge leap of judicial imagination and yet another small but valuable step towards justice for Australia’s dispossessed first peoples.
Michael Dillon is a visiting fellow at the Centre for Aboriginal Economic Policy Research at the Australian National University.

