
Last week, in this column, I recounted James’s story. Preparing to get married at my church, and having received a letter from the register office to the effect that it accepted it wasn’t a sham marriage, he had nonetheless been taken from his bed early one morning by the Home Office. James (not his real name) having got into the system through his marriage licence application, the Home Office’s wedding gift was to lock him up for overstaying his visa. And when it unceremoniously grabbed him, it didn’t say where it was taking him – it turned out to be the Verne immigration removal centre, in Portland, Dorset. On Wednesday, I went to see him.
This, in itself, is unusual. On average, detainees receive about two visits a month in immigration removal centres. In the Verne, the average is 0.2 visits a month. The place is so far away from the cities from which many of the inmates have been taken, and from which their family, friends and solicitors have to travel, it has been dubbed Britain’s loneliest migrant centre. From London, it’s a three-hour train journey, then about an hour on the bus to the Isle of Portland, then a marathon climb, rising nearly 500ft to the imposing stone gate, built by convict labour in the 19th century. Thomas Hardy called Portland “the Gibraltar of Wessex”. The view from the top of the road is magnificent. The glorious Chesil beach stretches out beneath you. The sun glistens off Weymouth bay. It was in these waters that Ben Ainslie won Olympic gold for sailing back in 2012. The whole place is full of pink staycation Brits with rubber rings and fish and chips.




How legitimate marriages have become Home Office honey traps | Giles Fraser | Loose canon




But James has never seen the view, not once. Despite the fact that the Verne is the highest thing for miles, the windows look out onto more walls and barbed wire. In here you could be anywhere, and nowhere. We meet in the visitors’ centre. Some couples stare at each other, not knowing what to say. Others make do without privacy to touch each other as best they can. Kids scribble in their colouring books. There is a broken table-football game and a vending machine. There were 393 recorded suicide attempts at immigration removal centres in 2015, up 11% from the year before. On average, more than one a day.
I could tell that the shy and softly spoken James was frightened by the place. Some of the inmates are considerably more boisterous than he is. Some have histories of violence. For all his time in this country, since he came here as a student, James has never troubled the law. He is ridiculously out of place in what is, to all intents and purposes, a prison. And a prison with indefinite detention. He hasn’t been sleeping well, he says, but the guards are nice.
I find visiting difficult and am not always very good at it. When in hospital myself, I generally hate people coming to see me, staying too long, inventing small talk, me not being able to get away from them. I think I’d shrivel up and die if a well-intentioned chaplain popped by for a cheery word. But the only thing worse than people coming to see you is them not coming to see you.
James and I speak a bit about his legal case, but we could have done that on the phone (the policy is to take away their mobile phones and replace them with the prison’s own, which do not have in-built cameras). I agree to post surety for him when he goes to court. We discuss the wedding plans – what a place to be choosing hymns. At least it doesn’t look like he is being bundled onto a plane, thank God. We have a hug.
The real challenge with visiting is having the antennae sensitive enough to pick up what the other person wants from you. Sometimes they want an emissary from home with a bit of gentle gossip. Sometimes they want that conversation everyone has been avoiding. Sometimes they want another person to pray with. It can feel very exposed going to see someone empty handed, without particular things to discuss. But mostly, people just want someone else to be there, listening, giving a damn. That easy. That hard.
@giles_fraser

