
My business, some would say, is steeped in the concept of “inspiration porn”. I go into schools, speaking to pupils about my Paralympic story with the explicit aim to inspire and motivate – I won bronze in 1996, and a bronze and a silver in 2000. However, the current debate around “inspiration” and what it means within the context of disability has given me pause for thought – perhaps it is not always the best way to accurately describe the experience of disability.




Disabled people aren’t here to inspire you | Charlie Swinbourne




As a former Paralympic swimmer for Australia, I have been watching Channel 4’s coverage, not to be inspired, but to cheer on the Aussie team (and Team GB, of course): to watch the hope, the frustration, the joy and the despair, to feel elation and sadness, excitement and disappointment. This whirlwind of emotions seems synonymous with the Paralympics, that idea of hope in overcoming the odds, the stories that may be sad, tragic, and moving. But are those same emotions not also synonymous with the Olympics?
Simone Biles comes to mind – one of the most “inspirational” stories from this year’s Games. There were two particular things that were mentioned with regards to her backstory: she is a black gymnast in an overwhelmingly white sport, and she is adopted. This became a part of her mythology, raising her to the “most inspirational” gold medal. Then there were “inspirational moments”, such as the moment when the US athlete Abbey D’Agostino fell in a women’s 5000m heat. Nikki Hamblin, a New Zealand runner, helped D’Agostino up, and they finished the race together. Even I teared up reading about this show of sportsmanship.
Even that was topped by the Refugee Olympic Team. They were not admired as the medal heroes of the games, or for the ease with which they broke world records; they are looked at with a mix of awe and pity. Their stories of fleeing war-torn countries, of terror and fear, eclipse their sporting prowess, just as the disability of Paralympians comes first, then their identity as elite athletes.


VIDEO


Elizabeth Wright takes silver at the 2000 Paralympics in Sydney - video


Inspiration porn is definitely a problem in the disabled world, but it is not restricted to disability. In fetishising difference and/or tragedy we fetishise all difference and tragedy, and feed off it – whether to feel intense emotion or to make ourselves feel better about our own lives.
Most disabled people don’t fetishise themselves, or others; what you will find in the day-to-day living of disabled people is that every normal action, routine and thought is exactly that: normal. As I sit here typing this article, using my left hand with a finger missing, and my shortened right arm, I don’t think of this action as heroic in any way, it is just getting on with life, as someone with 10 fingers does. That’s not to say that life isn’t harder for those with disabilities – I loathe stairs, and have to deal with blisters and pressure sores from my prosthetic. But that is all normal to me, just as having two working arms and two working legs may be normal for you.




 

We don’t judge able-bodied people against Usain Bolt, so shouldn’t expect all disabled people to be Jonnie Peacock




 

How does this normalisation of my disability fit with the fact that I am an inspirational speaker and Paralympian? In my current role I try to help people forget the disability and see the swimmer. My goal is to help people see their own potential, just as I saw mine, and to work hard to lift themselves up to fulfil that potential. I do address my disability, but it is addressed first, described and normalised as much as possible, and then my Paralympic story is told, without overt reference to my disability. To inspire I am simply a swimmer.
Most importantly, we have to remember this when it comes to inspiration porn and the Paralympics: just as only a few able-bodied athletes make it to the Olympics, so only a few disabled athletes make it to the Paralympics. The truth that not all able-bodied people are athletic applies equally to disabled people. So not all disabled people are inspirational. We don’t judge all able-bodied people against the achievements of Usain Bolt, or the heroism of the refugee team, so we shouldn’t expect all disabled people to live up to the achievements of Sarah Storey or Jonnie Peacock.
Inspiration has its place – I feel inspired by people all the time – but it doesn’t belong as the default category for disability.

