
This time four years ago, I’d just completed a dramatic conversion from Olympics sceptic to enthusiast. I was one of those annoying people who grumbled incessantly in the run-up to 2012 about what a waste of money it all was. But once it all started, like thousands of other Londoners, I happily accepted the error of my ways.
Women’s water polo, wheelchair basketball, climbing the Orbit: I enthusiastically snapped up tickets for anything that was available and spent far too much in the 2012 shop on tacky gear that now lies unworn at the back of my wardrobe. The only thing that marred my Olympics fever was the envy I felt seeing the Gamesmakers in their orange-and-purple kit. If only I’d had the foresight to know it was going to be great and applied to volunteer.
As Rio kicks off and 2012 fades into the distance, my feelings about the Olympics have become more mixed. There is something amazing about a competitive celebration of sport that brings together athletes from countries and cultures that don’t always see eye to eye, to compete on the same terms. The Olympics are a reminder that every game is beautiful in its own way: it doesn’t take megabucks-earning footballers to provide nail-baiting, adrenaline-fuelled entertainment. Then there’s the national pride – hosting the Olympics encourages people to celebrate their culture and identity, whether by swaying to the Girl From Ipanema or cheering as the Queen “parachutes” into the Olympic stadium.
But the Olympics have a darker side: the vast expense that host countries, rich or poor, are expected to cough up. Brazil is spending almost $10bn on hosting the Olympics on top of the $15bn it spent on the football World Cup two years ago. Yet it is a country racked by economic inequality, while having to cope with financial, political and health crises. Rio’s public-sector workers have been paid weeks late, while hospitals say they’ve run out of basic supplies. Is this really $25bn well spent?
The timelag is partly to blame: the International Olympics Committee (IOC) picks host cities seven years in advance. In 2009, booming Brazil would have seemed like a great bet for South America’s first Games.
But boom or not, cost is a universal problem. One Oxford study that looked at every Olympic Games hosted since 1960 found the vast majority were blighted by overspend. The Sochi Winter Games have been the most expensive yet, costing an eyewatering $51bn.
Proponents point to the economic benefits of hosting the games. But try telling that to Greece in the wake of Athens 2004. Too often, the promised long-term benefits, used as PR to win round sceptical publics, prove elusive.




 

The IOC should favour bids that plan to deliver the Games within the bounds of commercial sponsorship




 

Cities have become increasingly sceptical. After several cities pulled out of bidding for the 2022 Winter Olympics, the IOC was left with just two – Beijing and Almaty, in Kazakhstan, both from countries marred by terrible human rights records. In the end, they plumped for Beijing, which won’t even boast real snow. The bidding for the 2024 summer Games has also had high-profile dropouts. It feels as if “costlier” should be tacked on the end of the Olympics motto “faster, higher, stronger”.
It’s not just the vast expense involved. The Sochi Games were put on at great cost to human rights; similar concerns have been flagged with respect to Rio. Cheating is nothing new, but revelations that Russian security agents were actually involved in surreptitiously swapping athletes’ urine samples suggest it has reached new depths. And the IOC has never properly put to bed its issues with corruption.
It is hard not to feel that international sport has lost its way. But there has been the odd exception: Los Angeles put on one of the most modest-ever Olympics in 1984, using pre-existing venues. It even made a profit.
Without reforms more fundamental than the timid ones already offered by the IOC, the future of the Olympics looks grim. The job of hosting will increasingly be left to wealthy states with dodgy human-rights records, led by dictators happy to throw vast sums at vanity projects in order to draw the eyes of the world’s media. A far cry from the original spirit in which the Olympics were conceived.
The excesses involved undermine, rather than boost, the Olympic legacy. Four years on from 2012, when you can buy a Gamesmaker shirt for a fiver on eBay, you have to wonder whether it would have made much difference if we had spent half the amount. Had we been allowed by the IOC, we could have used existing venues across the country and boosted parts of the country even more in need of investment than east London. Some of the cash saved could have been spent on school sports budgets that have been slashed since 2012, much needed given that the proportion of privately educated athletes in Team GB has risen from 20% to 28% since 2012.
This will be the first Olympics in which people can cheer on the Refugee Olympic Team, which surely represents the very best of the Olympic spirit. But imagine if some of the billions saved from hosting a cheaper Olympics were spent on international aid to conflict-stricken countries and their low- and middle-income neighbours that host the vast majority of refugees, putting Europe to shame?
To encourage a more cut-price Olympics will require radical reform from the IOC. It should favour bids that plan to deliver the Games within the bounds of commercial sponsorship, as Los Angeles in 1984. And it should encourage countries – even whole regions – to put on the Olympics, rather than single cities. That might even allow Africa to host its first Olympics, making it a genuinely global endeavour.
To an Olympics fan like me, these reforms seem the definition of no-brainer. But I suspect the reason they haven’t yet materialised might have something to do with the fact that they would involve IOC officials making do not just with a less glamorous Olympics, but also a less glamorous set of perks.

