The photographs taken on Nice beach that emerged yesterday are mind-boggling in their violence: four armed, fully-clothed, male police officers surround a woman who is lying down on the sand in a headscarf and blue, long-sleeved top. They make her remove her shirt before writing up a ticket.

The officers were enforcing a recently imposed ban on 'burkinis', the full-length swimming costume favoured by conservative Muslims (and some Jews, too), which has been the subject of much recent debate. But the woman pictured was not even wearing a burkini.

Nice adopted the ban last week, the latest French municipality to do so. A further 15 southeastern resorts and towns in other parts of France have already banned the bathing suit in an ill-advised bid to protect a nation understandably anxious after a wave of brutal terror attacks.

Video shows French women being ordered out of sea for wearing burkinis

France has enacted bans to protect the nation’s secularism, enshrined by law, before. In 2004, it banned the headscarf and “conspicuous” religious symbols, such as crucifixes and the Jewish skullcap, in state schools. In 2010, it banned the wearing of niqab, a face-covering veil, in public.

Just let this sink in. Men with guns forcing a women to undress, with the weight of the law behind them. pic.twitter.com/4BI16Bbss9 — Abdul-Azim আজিম (@AbdulAzim) August 23, 2016

According to the wording of Nice’s ban, the move bars anything that “overtly manifests adherence to a religion at a time when France and places of worship are the target of terrorist attacks.” It specifically refers to the recent attack in the city on Bastille Day, which killed 86 people.

However, the sight of four armed men forcing a woman to remove her clothes in public should be a clear warning, not only of how ineffective banning a swimming costume will be in safeguarding against future attacks, but also of how dangerous the move is. It smacks of thoroughly illiberal hysteria.

Such incidents not only foment divisions at a time of fear and tension in France and Europe, they give succor to extremists who peddle an ‘us versus them’ narrative. For the likes of Isis, don’t these headlines – and an image of four men forcing a Muslim woman to undress – reinforce their narrative that the West is at war with Islam and Islamic culture, not with Islamists?

Even before yesterday’s shocking images from the shore, French public figures in favour of the ban had already provided Isis with a gift-wrapped propaganda opportunity. French Prime Minister Manuel Valls declared that the desire of conservative Muslims to cover up “is not compatible with the values of France and the Republic.” Christian Estrosi, President of the Regional Council of Provence-Alpes-Cote d’Azur, said in a letter to Valls that, “the preservation of our social pact and our nation requires the government to take all measures to fight against radical communitarian practices.”

Though many observant Jewish women are also partial to full-body swimwear, the Parisian Rabbi Moshe Sebbag said that the town mayors choosing to enact bans “understand today there’s a religious war, a takeover of the secular establishment of the French republic”. This is dangerous language.

In pictures: Bastille Day Nice attack







30 show all In pictures: Bastille Day Nice attack

























































1/30 A man reacts near bouquets of flowers near the scene where a truck ran into a crowd at high speed killing scores and injuring more who were celebrating the Bastille Day national holiday in Nice Reuters

2/30 A woman arrives with a toy and a bouquet of flowers as people pay tribute near the scene where a truck ran into a crowd in Nice Reuters

3/30 A woman reacts as she places flowers in front of the memorial set on the 'Promenade des Anglais' where the truck crashed into the crowd during the Bastille Day celebrations in Nice EPA

4/30 People gather to view the floral tributes near the site of the truck attack in the French resort city of Nice AP

5/30 A man reacts near bouquets of flowers as people pay tribute near the scene where a truck ran into a crowd at high speed killing scores and injuring more who were celebrating the Bastille Day national holiday, in Nice Reuters

6/30 Floral tributes are laid out near the site of the truck attack in the French resort city of Nice AP

7/30 A child's toy is placed among the floral tributes laid out near the site of the truck attack in the French resort city of Nice AP

8/30 Investigators continue at the scene near the heavy truck that ran into a crowd at high speed killing scores who were celebrating the Bastille Day in Nice Reuters

9/30 Crime scene investigators work on the 'Promenade des Anglais' after the truck crashed into the crowd during the Bastille Day celebrations in Nice EPA

10/30 A forensic expert examines dead bodies covered with a blue sheet on the Promenade des Anglais seafront in the French Riviera city of Nice Getty Images

11/30 A forensic expert evacuates a dead body on the Promenade des Anglais seafront in the French Riviera city of Nice, after a gunman smashed a truck into a crowd of revellers celebrating Bastille Day Getty Images

12/30 A man reacts as he sits near a French flag along the beachfront the day after a truck ran into a crowd at high speed killing scores celebrating the Bastille Day in Nice Reuters

13/30 Discarded items are left on the beach, not far from the site of the truck attack in the French resort city of Nice AP

14/30 Bullet holes in the windscreen of the lorry that was driven into the crowd at high speed Reuters

15/30 A man walks through debris on the street in Nice, France, the morning after a lorry ran into a crowd, killing at least 84 and injuring 50 Reuters

16/30 Rescue workers help an injured woman to get in a ambulance AFP/Getty Images

17/30 Authorities investigate a truck after it plowed through Bastille Day revelers in the French resort city of Nice, France AP

18/30 Celebrations of Bastille Day were targeted by the lorry driver AP

19/30 People cross the street with their hands on thier heads as a French soldier secures the area after at least 84 people were killed along the Promenade des Anglais in Nice Reuters

20/30 A paramedic attends one of the dozens of people injured in the Nice Bastille Day attack

21/30 Soldiers march on street where the lorry crashed into the crowd REUTERS

22/30 A man sits next to a body seen on the ground after at least 84 people were killed in Nice, when a truck ran into a crowd celebrating the Bastille Day national holiday Reuters

23/30 Bodies are seen on the ground after at least 84 people were killed in Nice, when a truck ran into a crowd celebrating the Bastille Day national holiday Reuters

24/30 Children were among the 84 killed in the atrocity, with around 50 more hospitalised Reuters

25/30 French Interior Minister Bernard Cazeneuve (2nd L) speaks to the media in Nice AFP/Getty Images

26/30 A man walks with his hands up as police officers carry out checks on people in the centre of French Riviera town of Nice AFP/Getty Images

27/30 With injured people laying in the street police and onlookers react near to a truck in Nice AP

28/30 Police officers, firefighters and rescue workers are seen at the site of the attack AFP/Getty Images

29/30 Police officers speak with a soldier after a truck that ploughed into a crowd leaving a fireworks display in the French Riviera town of Nice AFP/Getty Images

30/30 Police shine a light into the cab as they approach the driver's cab of a truck, in Nice AP

French Muslim women are being targeted for merely symbolising a threat in the French imagination, and their desire to dress modestly is being criminalised. The rabbi went on to say that wearing a burkini was “not innocent, it’s sending a message.” Valls also railed against the burkini representing the “enslavement of women,” as if this were about saving them. But the ban scapegoats women, sacrificing them on the altar of public anxiety. That is another form of enslavement.

Attacking a symbol cannot protect from violence. Humiliating Muslim women in what looks at best like a farce and at worse like militant secularism which will only feed extremists such as Isis. Proponents of Islamist ideology will be rubbing its hands with glee at the short-sightedness of the French.

Alona Ferber is editor for the Centre on Religion and Geopolitics at the Tony Blair Faith Foundation