
There are a lot of people in this world who are keen to talk down Australia at every opportunity.
We always focus on the negatives of the catastrophic failures in governance that have become a regular feature of the nightly news. But we never focus on the positives of these failures.
For example, there is a genuine chance that the failure of our census will ultimately lead to the end of the boat turnbacks policy, simply because refugees won’t want to flee to a country that can’t run a simple internet poll. But will Philip Adams ever tweet that point? I wouldn’t be holding my breath.
It’s not just the Guardian and the Conversation that are constantly spinning our failures as negatives. If you read the gutter research reports from the Australian Human Rights Commission (not to mention those nutters at the CSIRO), you might think that Australia’s record on human rights and the environment leaves a lot to be desired.




Experience: my attempt to go 21 days without a whinge ended up taking six months | Michael Dawson




But nothing could be further from the truth. There are plenty of internationally recognised measures in which Australia consistently ranks near the top.
Take, for instance, Australia’s human rights record when it comes to its treatment of Indigenous people. Last year, Australia was ranked in Amnesty International’s top three worst developed countries. And that was before the Don Dale revelations. Imagine what our rankings will be by this time next year!
This is why – after spending a lot of time with Donald Trump supporters this year – I have developed a special five-step process for Making Australia Great Again.
One: Learn from the masters at papering over government cuts
First up: to make Australia great we have to learn from the greats. And there is no greater country than the US, when it comes to papering over government cuts. What did the US government do when Congress refused to fund its statistics agency to conduct a census every five years? Simple: they decided to only conduct one every 10 years. Sure, this means that planning for hospitals, schools and roads remains 10 years behind the curve, but think of all that money that can instead be used on useful things like drone attacks on Arabs.
Two: Tone down the scrutiny
Secondly, when Australia does stuff up, there is often way too much scrutiny. The way Malcolm Turnbull jumped on the opportunity to establish a royal commission into the Northern Territory’s detention system shows how our politicians have been trained to react with knee-jerk accountability whenever something terrible happens to people who aren’t donors to your party.
A better model is to look at how Turnbull is treating calls for a royal commission into banks. Here he understands something that we should apply to everything in Australia: that perception matters more than reality. What we don’t know, can’t make us feel bad about ourselves.
Three: Shift the blame
Thirdly, when something terrible happens, always blame something else. This is something that Donald Trump is masterful at, but with which we struggle. Take for instance: refugee policy. The mortar-board-set keep trying to blame the government for our treatment of people fleeing for their lives. But what about the governments back in their homelands trying to kill them? Nobody ever blames them. It’s like blaming your neighbour for locking their door and not letting you into their house to escape a fleeing axe-murderer, rather than blaming the axe-murderer.
The point is, on many issues, from human rights to climate change, Australia shouldn’t be blamed for our bad behaviour when it’s often simply a consequence of the bad behaviour of others.
For example, when it comes to the destruction of the Great Barrier Reef, Australia should point the finger overseas at the nations burning the coal we’ve exported to them, not at our patriotic coal miners who haven’t burnt a piece of coal in their life.
Four: Watch more renovation shows
Fourth, to make Australia great again, people should watch more renovation shows on television. Programs like Four Corners and Q&A give you an unrealistically grim view of Australia, whereas Renovation Rumble makes you feel good. It’s all about improving Australia – not critiquing the institutions that run it.
According to my research, Four Corners has never once explained how to build a patio out from your dining room area to create both light and space. And it’s been on air for 55 years. What a disgrace.
Five: Build a wall
Finally, if we learn anything from Trump, it’s that Australia needs to build a wall around itself. Obviously, not a real wall. I tried that, but it kept on sinking into the ocean. Instead, it’s about building a metaphorical wall.
 Instead of listening to the UN agencies who despise our way of treating fellow human beings, and the international climate organisations that point to our emissions as being among the highest per capita in the world, we should stop listening to them, blow up some balloons, have a giant party and celebrate. If we try really hard, we can ignore the fact that we’re part of the rest of the world.
Charles Firth is the editor-in-chief of The Chaser Quarterly. Its latest issue is in bookstores and newsagents now, or at chaser.com.au/shop

