
School trips have become notoriously extravagant at Britain’s public schools of late, but even so, the visit by 11 Eton pupils to discuss world affairs for two hours last week with Vladimir Putin must rank among the most spectacular.
We don’t yet know how this extraordinary meeting, involving a school investment club, happened, but the general reaction has been to lambast Eton, once more, as a bastion of privilege whose boys enjoy unfair and undeserved advantages. However, in several ways it shows Eton and Etonians in a good light.




Eton boys secure private audience at the Kremlin with Vladimir Putin




One reason for the meeting was the tremendous persistence of pupils. “It took me a total of 10 months, 1,040 emails, 1,000 text messages, countless sleepless nights, constant paranoia during A2 exam season, declining academic performance,” wrote David Wei, one of the Eton 11, on Facebook. “But here we are.”
Persistence is an admirable quality. In this case, it was borne of a confidence not that the meeting would definitely be pulled off, but that there was a chance it might be. Granted, some of this confidence comes from Eton pupils’ privileged position, but it’s possible that less famous public schools, or state schools, could have achieved it too, if they had asked. To paraphrase the old National Lottery advert, research shows your chances of winning an interview greatly increase if you ask for one. Confidence is itself an admirable quality because it makes things happen.




 

The visit shows Eton’s credentials as an international school, composed of boys who want to know how the world works




 

The visit also shows Eton’s credentials as an international school, composed of boys who want to know how the world works. An institution composed of little Englanders would not have taught boys with an interest in organising a meeting that involved so much persistence to secure, but Eton has never been that. It has for centuries schooled British boys living overseas as well as foreigners. Perhaps the first overseas public school pupils of all were the four Russians who arrived in England in 1602 to learn English, visiting Eton and Winchester, with the aid of Giles Fletcher, England’s erstwhile ambassador to Moscow and an Old Etonian.


VIDEO


Because of this interest in the world beyond – not just beyond the school gates, but beyond the white cliffs of Dover – a number of public school pupils have become highly sympathetic connoisseurs of foreign cultures. St John Philby, educated at Westminster school, converted to Islam and helped Saudi Arabia negotiate with Britain and the US when oil was discovered in the kingdom; Joseph Needham, perhaps the greatest ever scholar on China outside the Middle Kingdom itself, went to Oundle School. Other public school boys, admittedly, took their interest in foreign culture a bit too far: Philby’s son Kim, who went to his father’s school, became a Soviet spy, and Sir Francis Verney, an Old Etonian, became a Barbary pirate in the 1600s. But at least they weren’t xenophobes.
The visit to Putin also shows Eton in a good way by underlining its tradition as a school with an intense interest in politics, training the boys in its arts. William Gladstone, the great reforming Victorian prime minister, honed his debating skills in “Pop”, the Eton society that then functioned as its debating forum. His father, Sir John, determined that at least one of his sons should succeed in politics, and saw an education at Eton and Christ Church, Oxford, as the best preparation for this goal.




Whatever the party, our political elite is an Oxbridge club | Carole Cadwalladr




Other public schools have similar strong traditions in politics and public policy, on the left as well as the right. William Beveridge, who designed the welfare state, had been at Charterhouse. Clement Attlee, who implemented it, had been at Haileybury, and became a socialist because of his experiences running the school’s mission in the East End of London. The Eton 11’s trip to see Putin may prove an equally eye-opening experience, if only in showing that ogres such as Putin are all the more dangerous because, face to face, they are often charismatic.
Finally, the meeting underlines the public schools’ superlative record at maintaining thriving school clubs. This is a state school weakness in comparison, partly because many of the teachers do not see it as integral to what their schools do. I once asked a teacher at one of the country’s highest-performing comprehensives whether he felt that the lack of extracurricular activities, compared with the local (lower-performing) public school, was a weakness. “They can save the money on school fees and pay for it all outside the school,” he said – rather missing the point, I thought.
We, meanwhile, are still left wondering why Putin agreed to the meeting. The fact that he has presumably heard of Eton probably helped. He may even know it, albeit second-hand, since he may well have apparatchiks whose sons are there, though the Russian elite’s preferred British school is Westminster. Perhaps, given that Eton has so far produced 19 prime ministers, he is playing a long game, in the hope that one of them may in 25 years’ time be the 20th. On present form Putin will probably still be in power by then, and can use this first meeting as a useful insight into the younger man’s psychology.
• David Turner is author The Old Boys – The Decline and Rise of the Public School

