
Most of the time, I don’t feel terribly patriotic – daily headlines about Donald Trump and mass shootings aren’t good for anyone’s national pride. But the Olympics have a way of turning even the most jaded American into a full-on Leslie Jones who suddenly cares as much about fencing and double sculls as they normally do about new Dorito flavors.
But it’s easy to feel patriotic when your country is dominating in the medal count. Maybe too easy: we’ve been cheering on Lilly King, the swimmer who called out her Russian rival for doping, and Katie Ledecky wins by such ridiculous margins it’s like watching a superhero compete against a group of toddlers.




US women's national team crash out on penalties after Sweden hold their nerve




But soccer, which remains more popular in just about every country in the world than in the United States, has recently started to become a new American pastime thanks to the overwhelming success of the women’s national team. That was, until Friday, when the team was handed a devastating defeat at the hands (or feet?) of Sweden. It didn’t take long for enraged US fans to use social media to threaten boycotts of Swedish companies such as Ikea and H&M. 
Leading that boycott? Perhaps Hope Solo, the controversial team goalie, whose off-pitch scandals, including an arrest for domestic violence, have made her unpopular in Rio – hecklers shouted “Zika!” at her during matches. Following the loss, Solo was clearly smarting. 
“I think we showed a lot of heart,” she said. “I’m very proud of this team. And I also think we played a bunch of cowards. The best team did not win today.” 
Solo’s sentiment, while coming from someone who was taking a recent loss extremely personally, sums up how US sports fans sometimes mistake the Olympics for something more like American Idol: it’s not just about who has the most talent; it’s about who has the best story to tell. As much as we love triumph-over-adversity stories like the Simones (Biles and Manuel) overcoming obstacles to win gold in their disciplines, that sentiment disappears the minute somebody else’s underdog story requires them to beat us.
While Ikea might need to put some of its meatballs in the deep freezer while the hubbub dies down (or until the US basketball team wins another gold medal and everybody moves along), Swedes seem to be laughing off the threats of boycotts or bans. Birk Nilsson, the Swedish-born, America-based cofounder of the e-commerce website Tictail, is one of them. “I’m thrilled to finally hear people talk about an Ikea boycott,” he told the Guardian. “Anyone who has ever had to use an Allen wrench can stand behind that sentiment.”
Americans who plan to follow through with the boycott instead of just talk smack on Twitter might want to skip their weekend viewing of Suicide Squad (Joel Kinnaman, who plays Rick Flag, is Swedish), cancel their Skype date (one of the service’s inventors was a Swede), stop ordering tasty coffees from Fika and quit listening to music by Robyn and Lykke Li. 
There is some good news, though: Swedish fish are owned by Cadbury, so it’s totally fine to keep eating the little red buggers. And is there any greater evidence of American exceptionalism than the existence of Swedish fish-flavored Oreos? I say no. Or perhaps “nej”.

