
When my son was in first grade, the FBI found evidence that one of his instructors was a potential child sex offender. They’d intercepted letters he’d been sending to prisons, including photographs of the students that he’d annotated with lewd captions, and they’d immediately contacted the school district.




Tell us about a time you faced your fear




The principal dismissed him and wrote to the parents. But the explanation eventually given to the kids was bare bones. After the instructor had been absent for a couple weeks, the substitute simply announced he was never coming back.
The incident served as a stark reminder that my son wasn’t somehow magically protected from child sexual abuse even though awareness had risen so much since the 1970s, when it happened to me. 
It also unearthed concerns of mine that I kept buried – that my abuse defined me somehow, in ways I wasn’t sure of but that I knew I didn’t want my son to see. Even the mention of sexual abuse in the upright, protected life I tried to create for my family made me feel exposed.
I avoided explaining to my then-quite-young son why his instructor had really been dismissed, but I started researching how to talk to kids about this topic anyway, as part of a memoir I was writing in search of greater understanding about my own past.
I’d been molested by a teenaged cousin while he lived with us. Decades later, I found out that the cousin was awaiting trial for doing the same thing to another little girl, an offense for which he was placed on the sex offender registry. Researching and writing had decreased my fear that this fact of my life had somehow contaminated me, but I still had trouble talking about it with an even tone. 
When another school authority figure was accused a few years later, though, I had the chance to broach the subject with my son again, this time prepared. I didn’t mention my own history, instead telling him about a time I was groped by a stranger. He looked at me wide-eyed.
“Has anything like that ever happened to you?” One of the things I’d learned in my research is that we should ask this question of our children outright, and not assume they will volunteer the information. 
He shook his head no. While I had his attention, I told him it wasn’t uncommon, and that it usually wasn’t a stranger who would do these things, but someone known and trusted. My heart pounded as I spoke. Again, I felt as if I was walking dangerously close to a cliff. Could he tell I wasn’t giving him the whole story? Would he be shocked and turn away from me if he knew the truth? 
My daughter is my younger child. As she approached the age I’d been when my abuse started, I had some flare-ups of sadness about my past and anxiety for her safety, as I’ve learned is common. But her forthrightness about issues related to her body made it easier to talk with her in the ways suggested by experts. She seemed less pained by the thought that trusted adults could do something bad, and more excited by her own power of refusal: “If anyone tries to touch me there I’ll tell them NO, and then I’ll tell you!” Her adamancy filled me with pride. I’d certainly never gotten this message when I was a child.
Still, I worried about how I should describe my memoir to my children as the publication day came closer. At first, I gave them only the most vague description. I’d grow tense if anyone said much about the book around them, and I took pains to keep my daughter away from my first signing, even though she wanted to attend. 
But my thoughts continued to evolve once the book was published. I’d come so far with my own feelings about childhood sexual abuse, and my general parenting style ran toward openness. If I really believed the message that survivors of sexual abuse have no reason to be ashamed, why did I remain so afraid to tell to my children, even in age-appropriate terms?




Facing my fear: did I have the cancer mutation that killed my dad? | Jean Hannah Edelstein




Eventually, I talked to them each more directly than I had expected to about the relative who had moved in with us and what he had done to me – how it had confused me for years. With my son, I used the words sexual abuse. With my daughter, I used the anatomical terms she was familiar with, and reminded her that no one is supposed to touch kids there except a parent or a doctor if they have to for her health. With them both, I strove to keep my voice conversational. The exchanges felt natural, and none of my fears about shocking or repelling my children bore out. 
Immediately, I felt like I did the right thing. If my kids know I have had this experience, they’re more likely to tell me if anyone approaches them. Research shows that children who disclose and are treated with respect and sensitivity are left with fewer adverse effects from sexual abuse, so anything that would encourage them to talk is a benefit. Research also shows that many children who confide do so to a peer. If any of their friends come to my children for support, I hope they’ll react calmly, without disbelief or horror, and assist them in getting help. 
Many people in our community knew I had published a memoir. I was riding in the back seat of a family friend’s minivan with my daughter when the other girl in the car asked me what the book was about. I perceived the girl’s parent listening closely, wondering how I’d handle this. For a moment, I felt a shiver of the old fear. I offered the child the vague answer: “It’s about my life, and some hard times in my childhood.”
My daughter looked over and gave me a conspiratorial smile. “I know what it’s really about,” she whispered. Then she patted my knee consolingly. Her confidence increases my own that she’ll be all right in the world.

