
All real Donald Trump press releases sound like they were composed of lines cut from satirical Donald Trump press releases. Even by those standards, however, you have to admire how his campaign’s latest effort on the enduring non-mystery of Barack Obama’s birthplace ascends to its point: “In 2011, Mr Trump was finally able to bring this ugly incident to its conclusion by successfully compelling President Obama to release his birth certificate,” this hallucinates. “Mr Trump did a great service to the president and the country by bringing closure to the issue that Hillary Clinton and her team first raised. Inarguably, Donald J Trump is a closer.”
Always. Be. Closing. Still: was that an argument, or a performance of Glengarry Glen Dross? By any relevant yardstick, it doesn’t matter. Like the 90s or herpes simplex, birtherism is back, if it ever even went out of fashion. What did go out of style, as is remarked upon several thousand times daily, is truth in politics. Is it terminal? Will truth in politics ever come back into fashion?




How Donald Trump seduced America’s white working class | JD Vance




Its influence has certainly contracted at such a rate that it seems reasonable to imagine the imminent establishment of the Spherical Earth Society. Membership of the Flat Earth Society – which maintained that the Earth was not a globe, despite absolutely overwhelming evidence to the contrary – is said to have peaked in the mid-1990s at about 3,500. At the current pace of decline, there is every chance that the Spherical Earth Society could hope for similar numbers by 2025. We must picture these last few pitied or ridiculed souls as a community who stubbornly trade political statistics and facts, despite the absolutely overwhelming evidence that such things are of sublime irrelevance in the modern era.
As someone who still covets the wisdom of age, and always hopes to belatedly acquire the wisdom having banked the age (I am 42), I have not enjoyed watching so many of the righteous public figures I have long admired fail to make any headway in pushing back against Trump’s post-fact world. They seem so … impotent.









Jimmy Fallon messes up Trump’s famous hairdo on The Tonight Show


Don’t get me wrong – it doesn’t mean their immense experience is a joke or that they’re wrong or misguided to try. Far from it. That an American psycho stands but one remove from the White House is as deadly serious as it gets, and those opposed to Trump’s hideous and historically ominous ideology must do everything they can to stop him. I do not mean to sound defeatist. But I am constantly staggered at how staggeringly ineffectual those who were once the best and the brightest are in the face of post-fact posturing.
I wish it were otherwise, but there is something very dating about the mere act of engaging with Trump’s lies, like watching a respected comedian misfire with an out-of-touch bit about Snapchat. To watch a pundit even begin to pick apart that birther non-apology is to watch a human being age 10 years on screen in the time it takes to get to “Donald J Trump is a closer”. You might as well have a Socratic debate with a fart.
A decade or so ago, I remember reading a statistic about how pretty much everyone under a certain cut-off age instinctively rang doorbells with their thumb – raised on games consoles and mobile phones and whatnot – while pretty much everyone over the age still used an index finger. I detect something of that quaint chasm now when I watch even political idols rebutting Trump.
The brilliant David Simon, creator of The Wire, on Thursday seemed to be agreeing with the author Jeff Pearlman that the downsizing of journalism was responsible for “terrible” coverage of the election. “You can hire 22-year-olds to write,” Pearlman lamented, “but can they report?” “Or think about what they are reporting or not reporting,” added Simon, “and why.” I know what they mean. But with the greatest of respect to these viewpoints, I can’t help feeling that a good portion of our best hope for countering Trumpvision lies in the hands of that younger (to me) generation, who reflexively seem to understand what in the name of insanity is happening now far better than their elders, and increasingly seem more likely to find a way of countering it.


VIDEO


Rick Astley: Never Gonna Give You Up


Youth isn’t always wasted on the young, and even the most self-regarding old hands must concede that Trump has almost all of them looking flatfooted. Please think fondly of that exchange in the Simpsons, where a hack says to Bart after some impudence: “I’m an investigative reporter who’s on the road a lot, and uh, I must say that in my day, we didn’t talk to our elders like that.” “Well,” replies Bart, “this is my day, and we do.”
Perhaps truth in politics will have some of its status restored in the event of a Hillary Clinton win. Perhaps truth in politics will return ironically, like dad jeans or Rick Astley. Whether truth will ever be the market leader again, however, seems less certain with every hour of this mesmerically modern US presidential campaign (just as it did, in a smaller and even more post-imperial kinda way, during the Brexit referendum).
Then again, perhaps anxiety about the absence of truth is far older than we neophytes care to imagine, there being precisely nothing new under the sun. “If truth be not fled with Astraea,” remarked Jonathan Swift all the way back in 1711, “she is certainly as hidden as the source of the Nile itself, and can be found only in Utopia.” Perhaps she can once again be found in the 24-hour political news cycle – though at present, you certainly wouldn’t rule it in.

