
Over the coming months, you will hear much chatter from Theresa May’s government about building a society for the many, not the few, that all will share in prosperity, and that vested interests at the top will be challenged. This shameless raiding of leftwing rhetoric will stand in total contradiction to the government’s actual policies. Such cynicism is sometimes called “politics”. The truth is we have a government waging war against social cohesion and the “hard-working people” it occasionally likes to patronise.




Social housing tenants face soaring rents under 'pay to stay' policy




When it came to social housing, the postwar Labour government had a vision of inclusive communities embracing people of all backgrounds. “We should try to introduce in our modern villages and towns what was always the lovely feature of English and Welsh villages, where the doctor, the grocer, the butcher and the farm labourer all lived in the same street,” declared Nye Bevan – who both founded the NHS and instigated a mass council house-building programme – in 1945. “I believe that is essential for the full life of a citizen … to see the living tapestry of a mixed community.” It is this vision that the Conservatives are determined to permanently eradicate.
This country has a growing housing crisis, one that is increasingly enveloping the lives of the young in particular. The principal cause of this crisis is the failure to build housing: a statement of the obvious, for sure, but sometimes stating the obvious can be a revolutionary act. Indeed, not since the 1920s has there been such a sustained low level of housebuilding in peacetime. Hundreds of thousands of families find themselves trapped on social housing waiting lists.
The failure to replace council housing stock sold off in the 1980s – a policy so disastrous that a close friend of Margaret Thatcher tells me even she regretted it – was great for the buy-to-let landlords who snapped so much of it up but terrible for the next generation. A deregulated private rented sector offers a toxic mix of high rents and insecure tenancies. Last year private landlords benefited from £9.3bn-worth of housing benefit: money that would have been better spent on building homes, not subsidising unaffordable rents. Home ownership, meanwhile, is at its lowest level in three decades, and among younger Britons it has been in a state of freefall.
The government could have chosen to solve this growing crisis by building homes that people could afford to live in. But that would have been too sensible. Instead it has effectively punished some of the most struggling members of British society – hitting disproportionately disabled social tenants with the bedroom tax, or making cuts to social security – while extending the disaster of right-to-buy to housing associations.


VIDEO


And now it is introducing a policy of “pay to stay” for social tenants, supposedly to force high earners to pay market rents. The original posterboy for this policy was Bob Crow, the late leader of the RMT transport union, who was demonised for living in a council house despite receiving a substantial trade union general secretary pay packet. He couldn’t win: as a prominent advocate of council housing to be an option for all, he would have been swiftly labelled a hypocrite if he had opted for home ownership. But pay-to-stay has working families on far lower salaries in its sights. English households with a combined income of over £31,000 – and Londoners on over £40,000 – are to be targeted. For more than 70,000 tenants, that means an average rent increase of over £1,000 a year.
Ah, but why should people doing OK take up valuable social housing space when the more deserving could take their place? This argument is so wrong it is difficult to know where to begin. For a start, many of these middle-income families will struggle to find alternative housing they can afford in their community. They will have to leave not just their home; they will be forced to leave the community in which they and their families live. Low-income people are struggling to get the social housing many desperately need – but that is because of the failure to build it.
This is the classic Tory divide-and-rule approach, encouraging neighbours to turn on one another over the failure of government policy. In the end, it is low-income people who will suffer, too. British cities will become more like Paris, with an affluent centre surrounded by neglected areas of deprivation. The more social housing is residualised – that is, confined to those struggling the most – the more it will be demonised, and the less likely it is to be built. Council housing is often portrayed as a problematic den of worklessness. And yet, by emptying social housing of working people earning a middling salary, pay-to-stay is exactly the sort of policy that ensures the caricature is realised. If Bevan’s vision was maintained, and good-quality council housing was a genuine option for people from all backgrounds, then governments would build it, as both Labour and Conservatives once did.




What is pay to stay and who will be affected?




This is a clear attack on aspiration, too. If the living standards of working people increase, then they are either hit with a whopping big increase in rent or are forced to leave their own homes. The government estimated its policy would save £365m; the Local Government Association believes the true figure is a fraction of this sum. What would really save money in the longer term is building council housing, because it would create employment, stimulate the economy and reduce the housing benefit bill that subsidises private landlords’ extortionate rents.
And consider what Southwark council’s Stephanie Cryan – cabinet member for housing – has described as a “bureaucratic nightmare” for councils, which will now be forced to monitor the incomes of all their tenants. As well as “an intrusion on people’s privacy,” she says, “it would be almost impossible to prove people’s income”.
The Tories simply do not believe in social housing, regarding it as one of the vestiges of British socialism that needs to be eliminated. it believes that social housing embeds a collectivist mindset, rather than its preferred philosophy of rugged individualism. That’s what drives policies from the extension of right-to-buy to ending the right to lifetime tenancies in social housing.
A decent, affordable house should be regarded as a basic right. The housing crisis damages the health, wellbeing and educational prospects of millions of people. Driving middle-income people out of their homes is no solution; building good, decent-quality council housing people want to live in is. If only we had a government, driven by common sense rather than dogma, that understood this.

