
When they come to make Trump: The Movie, what will be the plot? For a long while I’d thought the obvious structure was that of The Producers, the classic Mel Brooks tale of the Broadway duo who realise they can make a fortune by staging a surefire flop. To hold on to their investors’ money, they set about sabotaging their own show, making it as repellent as possible. The showstopper is the appalling, offensive dance number Springtime for Hitler. The trouble is, the audience love it.
Surely that’s the only plausible explanation for Donald Trump’s presidential campaign. How else to explain why he would launch it by insulting whole classes of people, including those usually seen as beyond criticism. Mocking a disabled man, quipping that John McCain, a PoW in Vietnam, was not a real war hero because he was captured, or suggesting a Fox News host took against him because she was “bleeding from her whatever”. These moves are to electoral success what goose-stepping Nazis are to Broadway musicals: they’re not meant to work.


VIDEO


Springtime for Hitler from The Producers (1968)


And yet, in the Republican primaries, Trump kept winning. Even now, he polls close to or even ahead of Hillary Clinton. Like Brooks’s creations Bialystock and Bloom before him, this is making Trump desperate. What does a guy have to do to lose this damned election? He gets his wife to plagiarise a speech from Michelle Obama. That doesn’t do the trick. He runs a shambolic convention, filling the prime-time hours with C-list soap actresses and avocado growers – and, on one night, a C-list soap actress turned avocado grower – and still his polls don’t tank. Until finally, as if at the end of his tether, he commits a public act of treason, urging Russia to hack and leak the emails of his rival, even if they contain material sensitive to America’s national security. For heaven’s sake, surely now Americans will end Trump’s agony and reject him?
Which brings us to the alternative plot structure for the imminent Trump biopic. The Manchurian Candidate was a 1959 novel and 1962 film that imagined Soviet Russia brainwashing a young man, ensuring he was embedded into the American body politic and waiting until the moment was ripe to activate him for his designated role in a presidential election. Could Trump be a leftover from the cold war, a sleeper who’s slumbered until now but is primed and ready to serve Moscow?
It’s hard to think of a better explanation for the way he’s conducted himself, whether it’s rewriting the Republican platform to be kinder and gentler towards Russia in its conflict with Ukraine or imperilling Nato by declaring that he would not necessarily defend one of the Baltic states from hypothetical Russian invasion. And now, as if thrilled to drop his cover at last, he publicly calls on his Moscow masters to steal US secrets to swing an election.




Trump's comments on Russia denounced as 'shocking and dangerous'




I’m not the only one to have wondered if Trump is a real-life Max Bialystock or Man from Manchuria. Both of these outlandish theories arise out of the current liberal bafflement: his opponents keep exposing Trump, revealing his serial dishonesties and absurdities and yet it doesn’t destroy him. What on earth will it take?
The problem, and it’s one familiar from the UK battle over Brexit, is that the two sides are fighting on different battlefields or, worse, in different languages. As the writer Clay Shirky put it, Democrats who respond to Trump by patiently noting his contradictions and untruths are making a category error: “We’ve brought fact-checkers to a culture war”.
It was a similar story in Britain last month, as remainers sought to rebut the case for leave by insisting that the notorious £350m was bogus or that it was false to promise we could simultaneously stay inside the single market and halt EU immigration. But, though correct, those remainers were responding in the wrong idiom. Leave was channelling a howl of pain from those who felt that 21st-century life was passing them by. Too often, remain replied as if they were taking part in a policy seminar.
There has to be a better way for liberals and progressives to counter the surging populism of the right, one that combines two crucial elements: prose and poetry. Start with the prose. The centre-left needs to address the sources of the fear, pain and rage that fuels a Trump, Le Pen or Farage. That means having a response to the globalisation and automisation that has left so many millions feeling as if they, and the once flush towns they live in, have been consigned to the scrap heap. It means taming globalisation so that both its costs and benefits are shared more evenly. Right now, those at the top get the rewards while those at the bottom pay the price.











Don’t let Trump fool you: rightwing populism is the new normal


There are policy answers, starting with putting people back to work in jobs that pay decent wages. Spending billions to repair the fabric of the country – whether that be the bridges, tunnels and roads that are falling apart in the US or giving a lick of paint to towns that have been neglected for 50 years in Britain – is the obvious place to start. Borrowing the money won’t cost much in this age of near-zero interest rates and it would have a double benefit: both providing jobs for, and improving the home towns of, those who have lost most. Credit to Hillary Clinton, who on Thursday promised “the biggest investment in new, good-paying jobs since World War Two”. Credit too to Owen Smith for launching his Labour leadership campaign with a call for £200bn of infrastructure spending.
In the US, anti-Trump forces need an answer on trade, just as British progressives need to craft a strong message on immigration, one that shows they truly get why people are so troubled by it. Part of that will be measures to cushion immigration’s impact, with a cash fund dedicated to relieving the strain on services, but it will also require an understanding that this is about more than money. Democrats and remainers alike need to have something meaningful to say about both economic hardship and identity, which together are propelling the populist right.
But they also need to find a new way to say it. Which is where the poetry comes in. Trump’s strength is his ability to speak directly to the gut, often bypassing the cerebral cortex altogether. It’s no good for enlightened types to harrumph their disapproval. If such an approach is effective, they need to deploy it themselves. If the political brain is an emotional brain, as the evidence has long suggested it is, then progressives need to start speaking fluent emotion.
And it can be done. Michelle Obama’s speech to the Democratic convention scored so highly not just because it was perfectly executed, which it was, but because it spoke to the heart as directly as any philippic from the right. There were no stats or indigestible abstractions. It communicated emotionally. But the emotion it roused was hope rather than fear, optimism rather than pessimism, even love rather than hate.
Admittedly, these moments, when the left – broadly defined – stir the passions as effectively as any demagogue of the right are rare. Perhaps the last one we witnessed in Britain came four years ago this week, with Danny Boyle’s opening ceremony for the London Olympics. It showed a Britain that was proud and strong, one relaxed in the variety of all its different faces and open to the world. (The Democrats’ gathering in Philadelphia this week sent the same message, snatching both patriotism and optimism from the Republicans.) That was the way remain should have taken on leave, matching its vision with a patriotic one of its own, countering its appeal to the gut with one even stronger. Instead it came to a knife-fight armed only with an abacus.
This is the challenge now. To realise that in the battle of hearts and minds, it’s never enough to win just one. You need to win both.

