It is hard to disagree with Barack Obama’s assessment that Libya today – ravaged by civil war – is “a shit show”, as Wednesday’s damning report by MPs on intervention notes. The question is whether David Cameron and others should have foreseen a disaster in the making. The parliamentary vote for action to protect civilians was straightforward; only 13 MPs opposed it. Most of the members of the House of Commons foreign affairs select committee, now so critical of intervention, backed it. It is easy in retrospect to lump it in with Iraq as a foreign folly, and there are important parallels – not least the failure to plan for stabilisation and reconstruction, or to heed the evident perils of action. But it is also important to note differences between a gratuitous, proactive invasion and a response to a direct threat to the citizens of Benghazi, triggered by the spontaneous uprising of the Libyan people. Memories of Srebrenica spurred on decision-makers.

Perhaps most critically, western intervention – fronted by France and the UK, but powered by the US – came under a United Nations security council resolution for the protection of civilians, after the Arab League called for a no-fly zone. The US, realising that that would be inadequate to prevent a massacre, added the words “by all necessary measures”. Ambiguity was built in because it suited everyone, allowing Russia and China to abstain, and the west to cross its fingers and hope for an easy solution that never materialised. Mission creep, from protection to regime change, was perhaps an almost inevitable result. But the committee rightly faults Mr Cameron for failing to consider adequately alternatives to removing Muammar Gaddafi, and to prepare for the effects of his ousting. Mr Obama has already cited the lack of planning as the biggest mistake of his presidency.

No one wanted foreign boots on the ground; certainly not most Libyans, thanks to their bitter experience of colonialism. But the failure to convince militias to put down their arms bred the current chaos. Europe is belatedly coming to terms with the fallout: refugees fleeing across the sea and the fuelling of Islamic State, even if the latter is being pushed back.

The country has splintered, thanks to the vacuum left by Gaddafi’s destruction of the state, as much as the divisions between Islamists and former regime members, longstanding regional differences and tribal allegiances. The unelected, hastily assembled, UN-backed Government of National Accord was limping even before powerful eastern general Khalifa Haftar seized major oil ports.

The country is already awash with 20m weapons, but proper enforcement of the arms embargo to curb the flow of ammunition might stem at least some of the violence. Persuading the many foreign players to buy into that would be tough at the best of times and Syria has eaten up the limited attention the US has to spare for international affairs right now.

In the meantime, the UK and others must take greater responsibility for negotiating a way out of the mess they helped create. A starting point would be transparency on the UK military operation, disclosing the role of special forces, military advisers and so on. If there is one clear lesson from Libya, it is the need to look at the situation as it really is and not as one might hope it to be.