
What are the new government’s intentions towards China; is there a rationale, and do ministers know what it is? Although the prime minister is on holiday in Switzerland, she has contrived to feature in the headlines almost every day, and her latest contribution takes the form of a letter to the Chinese president and prime minister, hand-delivered by the UK’s Asia minister during a visit to Beijing. In it, according to the Chinese, Theresa May confirms that she will visit China next month and “looks forward to strengthening cooperation … on trade and business and on global issues”.
Now appearance and substance need to be separated here. Whoever was UK prime minister was always likely to visit Beijing in September. China will be hosting the G20 summit; the UK has been an active member of the G20, which came into its own after the 2008 financial crisis, and it would have constituted more of a statement if May had decided not to go.




Theresa May reassures Xi Jinping over UK-China relations




What is significant is less that she is going, or even that she has written to the Chinese prime minister, than that both moves have been made so public, and right now. It would appear that there has been a degree of scrambling in Downing Street and a rather urgent effort to smooth ruffled Chinese feathers, following May’s decision to pause a final decision on the Hinkley Point power project which was to be part-funded by the Chinese.
This was one of May’s first decisions as prime minister, and although justified by officials – and justifiable in many ways – its handling was unusually clumsy and last minute. The UK’s revised position was announced only hours before the final signing ceremony, after the French company EDF had (not without difficulty) cleared its part of the deal, with the Chinese part-funders raring to go, all the participants assembled, and the celebratory lunch all but laid out in a marquee at the site.
For those asking whether the May government was going to be different from Cameron-Osborne, the postponement of a final decision on Hinkley Point offered dramatic proof in at least one area. There were dark hints – unattributed – about national security concerns, and a distinct sense that not just this cooperation on nuclear power, but the whole China focus favoured by George Osborne, was being reconsidered.




 

There was a distinct sense that the whole China focus favoured by George Osborne, was being reconsidered




 

All of which was fine and good as a message for the UK public, but the response in China seems to have been underestimated. Rather than taking the delay in their stride – as the French and EDF did, officially at least – the Chinese fired off an unusual, and unusually swift, broadside, in the form of a Financial Times article by the Chinese ambassador in London. Liu Xiaoming more than hinted that the 11th-hour postponement was seen as an unfriendly move and that the new government risked jeopardising future relations with China more broadly. “If Britain’s openness is a condition for bilateral co-operation, then mutual trust is the very foundation on which this is built,” he said.
How much conviction will May’s response command in the Chinese corridors of power? Much will depend on the final decision the May government eventually reaches on Hinkley Point – but by no means all. The trust that David Cameron and Osborne had tried to forge, with apparent success, has undoubtedly been damaged. China’s acutely sensitive nose has been put out of joint. From the perspective of the UK’s long-term national interest, however, this may be no bad thing.

