Theresa May freewheeled through the opening weeks of her premiership. She was fortunate to enjoy a combination of a summer recess, post-referendum political fatigue and feelgood Olympic distraction. Decent economic numbers, Labour divisions and the Tory party rallying behind her have helped too. With her own generally sure-footed approach, these have all ensured that she has enjoyed, if not a honeymoon, then certainly a relatively easy start. A new Guardian-ICM poll showing the Conservatives with a comfortable 41%-27% lead over Labour means Tories will feel they have made the right choice and are on track.

Today’s cabinet meeting at Chequers marked the restart of traditional politics after the break. It began with a choreographed reminder that this government has so far offered Potemkin village politics. With her ministers around the table, Mrs May made a version of her stock summer speech about Brexit meaning Brexit, no second referendum being possible and the importance of this being a country that works for everyone. Ministers made approving noises to show their loyalty and agreement. But it was all for the cameras and all largely meaningless.

The reason for that, as the results of the day’s discussion proved, is Brexit. Brexit means big unavoidable bad choices between rival interests. In the end it means, above everything else, having to declare priorities. Today it became clear that the government has begun to harden on its priorities. Until now, the language about soft Brexit and hard Brexit had concealed that, almost as much the circularity of Brexit meaning Brexit. Yet the statement after the cabinet makes clear that there is now a direction of political travel.

The cabinet view today was that it wants to prioritise tighter rules on migration, which is what two-thirds of leave voters think is the big need, rather than to maximise the UK’s access to the European single market, as business, the City and, in particular, the Treasury prefer. This isn’t the end of that argument. In many ways it is only the beginning. Many in the government will still look for the best of both worlds. But that is not on offer. Nothing will matter more in the lifetime of the May government than where it ends up taking its stand on the spectrum between the two poles of migration control and access to the single market. At this early stage, though, Mrs May’s preference is clear.

There can, of course, be attempts to strike various kinds of compromise: more access to Europe traded for rather fewer restrictions on migration. Politically, however, this risks being the worst of both worlds, not the best. Limited access to the single market may help richer sectors like financial services and higher education, which wanted to remain in the EU, while further angering the poorer ones whose workforces voted to leave.

The brute fact facing ministers is that, if Brexit means a European Economic Area deal (a so-called soft Brexit), it will be seen as a betrayal of working-class leave voters in favour of those in a City that wanted to remain. But if Brexit means instead a migration clampdown and little access to the single market (hard Brexit) it will fuel business’s demands for laxer regulation and lower business and personal tax regimes, creating an Irish-style regime outside the EU, with profoundly serious consequences for the poor as inequality widens and public spending is cut further.

None of these choices is either desirable or likely to be popular in the long run. It is why the Brexit vote was so serious. It is why, in the end, voters will have to pass a democratic verdict on what the government decides this winter. Whether that takes the eventual form of a second referendum or a defining election is not the immediate point. The point is that if Britain is to have a serious chance of being a country that works for everyone, there will have to be a different strategy, as well as a plausible alternative government to make it happen.