For a party with one MP and poll ratings that rarely reach double figures, the Greens have exerted a disproportionate influence on national politics, while also failing to fulfil their potential.

One explanation for this contradiction is the party’s self-imposed confinement to the leftmost portion of the electoral battleground. In last May’s general election, the Greens won 3.8% of the vote – a record performance but not the breakthrough that had been forecast earlier in the campaign. The greatest impact was on the Labour party.

In the aftermath of the election, the modest Green “surge” was read by many on the left as a symptom of Labour having surrendered the hallowed space of principled opposition to a pluckier, more radical rival. That was a factor steering disheartened members in the direction then advocated by Jeremy Corbyn. The feeling was mutual, with some Green supporters transferring their loyalty to Mr Corbyn or dividing their allegiance between the two parties.

This dynamic contains a challenge for Caroline Lucas and Jonathan Bartley, named yesterday as co-leaders of Green party of England and Wales. (The unprecedented job-sharing arrangement reflects well on the party’s willingness to embrace alternative ways of conducting politics – in this case playing catch-up with a tried and tested practice in many British workplaces.)

Ms Lucas, MP for Brighton, and Mr Bartley, the party’s work and pensions spokesman, take over from Natalie Bennett, whose tenure looks, with hindsight, like a period of steady growth and missed opportunity.

Under Ms Bennett, the Greens stood on a platform of wide-ranging assault on austerity and free-market capitalism. This yielded a dividend in attracting defectors from Labour and the Liberal Democrats. It also cast the party as a vehicle for radical left protest politics – a role that Mr Corbyn has now usurped and seems unlikely to surrender.

Ms Lucas and Mr Bartley now have to decide whether they are happy to be ideological satellites in orbit around a Corbynised Labour. If not, they must find a way to reassert a distinct Green identity. Speaking after their commanding victory – their joint ticket took 86% of first-preference votes – the new leaders gave some indication of their priorities: Ms Lucas called for a second referendum to ratify the outcome of any Brexit settlement negotiated by the government; Mr Bartley made the case for electoral reform and committed the Greens to collaboration with other parties in the formation of a “progressive alliance”.

That is a reasonable ambition given the increasingly fluid nature of political affiliation in Britain, although the concept is advocated more often than it is defined. It too often refers to a theoretical coalition united by little more than shared antipathy towards the Conservative party. It masks significant differences of policy, ideology and strategy between and within self-identifying forces of “progress” – not least the question of whether private enterprise and markets are to be harnessed or dismantled in pursuit of environmental protection and social justice.

In that context, Ms Lucas and Mr Bartley have a choice to make between the politics of generalised, green-tinged anti-capitalist agitation and a more strategically-minded deployment of arguments on energy and climate change that might resonate across the political spectrum. They could, for example, break an old taboo and acknowledge that an environmental conscience is not the exclusive property of the left.

That does not mean the party needs to repudiate current positions, only that it acknowledge the extent to which green politics is seen by many non-aligned voters as an obsession for the radical fringe – and one that demands onerous material sacrifices from everyone else.

If real progress is to be made, the case must more effectively be made that action to protect the environment can be taken in ways that enhance prosperity and security; indeed that inaction is the more perilous course. People who are not already wedded to green causes need reassurance that it is an agenda fit for mainstream participation.

British voters are amply served by Labour if they want broad-brush complaint about the Tories and economic inequality. The Greens should not be jostling for position in a race to have the most radical-sounding exposition of every problem, but occupy instead the available niche for a progressive party, focused on the environment and trading in imaginative, pragmatic solutions.