
It was inevitable that I would become involved with a service charity, having family connections to the military from as long ago as the first world war. My grandfather was in the Royal Naval Air Service, my father was a pilot in the Royal Air Force, my husband and I were in the RAF, too – and our daughter is now serving as an officer in the Royal Navy.




British Legion row over women's section risks revolt by poppy sellers




My earliest memory of the Royal British Legion (RBL) is going from house to house collecting for the poppy appeal with my mother when I was around seven years old. As a family we were never allowed to miss the annual Royal Albert Hall Festival of Remembrance. I have been a member of the women’s section (WS) in Norfolk for 23 years, serving at local and county level, and am currently acting county vice chair of Norfolk.
The women’s section of the British Legion was formed in 1921, just after the RBL itself, when it became obvious that not only did the servicemen require help after the devastating war, but their families were suffering, too, and needed some kind of support. At the time, as we understand it, the men did not want to have ladies in their organisation, so a separate unit was set up.
Since then, the WS has run as a semi-independent organisation, with 29,000 members in just over 700 branches. We have our own welfare schemes, national officers and a very small staff at head office. We have always been a part of the RBL, and our badge has the same centrepiece as the RBL, with arms to the side saying “women’s section”, symbolising the arms enfolding the family, as our local chairman, Hazel Kingswood, describes it.
All branches of the WS received a letter from head office one week before Christmas last year stating that from 1 October 2016 it would become a “district” of the RBL. This meant the WS no longer would operate as a separate organisation; have a representative on the board of trustees; or be able to lay our national standard at the Cenotaph in November. Indeed, we were told at the time that our standard would have to be “laid up” – meaning put into the care of a church/cathedral for evermore. To be told our national standard would be taken away from us was devastating as this was our greatest symbol – and the public face of the whole organisation.




 

If only we had been included and given a choice in how we saw our future, then all the upset could have been avoided




 

The ladies were shocked and upset to be informed in this way, bearing in mind that we are a democratic organisation, with issues voted on at national conference each year, and we had no idea that such a major change was to be forced upon us without discussion with the membership. The RBL says that our national officers knew about it, but as the WS chairman was told she had to comply with their “confidentiality” clause, nothing was passed down to the shop floor.
Consequently, hundreds of letters were sent to Chris Simpkins, who was then RBL director general, expressing dismay and disgust at what felt like such a dictatorial attitude. I received a letter from one of our ladies who had given around 60 years of service to the organisation and who had kept her branch going through difficult times, asking if there could be more consideration of the plans. This letter was so genuine and from the heart that I was in tears while reading it. I sent a copy to Simpkins, but no reply was ever sent – and as far as we know, no other letters were acknowledged. The RBL national chairman, John Crisford, said “we do value the work of the women’s section” – but this is certainly not what the ladies feel, and it is their opinion that the decision is “all down to money”.
Whatever happens now – the board of trustees say that it is to include two WS committee members in future discussions – it feels to our members that it is too little, too late. We all appreciate that some changes probably did need to take place so some costs could be reduced. Like a lot of other organisations, it is difficult to recruit and maintain membership these days, as younger people operate in a different way with their support of charities. But if only we had been included and given a choice in how we saw our future, then all the upset could have been avoided.
As it stands, branches are already closing. If it was ever the expectation that all the WS ladies would automatically transfer to the RBL, then this is not going to happen. Some certainly will do so, because in truth we have always worked well alongside our local RBL members and we don’t have a problem there – our problem has been with the board of trustees and the way that the situation has been handled.
During this debacle, we have been told by the RBL to “think of the beneficiaries” and that is exactly what we are doing and will continue to do, but possibly through different means. The Legion ladies have always tried to be inventive with their activities, and we will continue to put the “fun” into fundraising.
Sadly, as I said at our conference in April, quoting Abraham Lincoln: “A house divided against itself cannot stand.” There is every risk that there will be damage done to the reputation of the Royal British Legion itself through the closure of the women’s section, which is something that no one wants. It is just a shame that the change was not implemented in a more coherent and sensitive way, and more respect not given to our wonderful ladies.

