Rural England and Wales was the bedrock of the Brexit vote. It may well be in the countryside that the impact of the decision first becomes visible. After 40 years of the notorious common agricultural policy, Westminster rather than Brussels will be deciding a national strategy for food and farming. Subsidies currently worth £3bn a year will be replaced; hundreds of thousands of workers from mainland Europe who pick fruit, work in slaughterhouses, on dairy farms or in the poultry industry, doing hard, low-paid jobs, may lose the right to come to Britain. The debate about what farming should look like and what its priorities should be for this new age is likely to be one of the most fiercely argued questions as Britain’s economy is reshaped. On Thursday, the National Trust, supported by 4 million members and owner of much that is best beloved in the English and Welsh countryside, kicks it all off – by proposing a revolution.

National Trust calls for complete reform of British farm subsidies Read more

The NT, the largest farmer in England and Wales, with 618,000 acres and 2,000 tenants, founded to protect the landscape, has a vision of an agriculture policy that puts the environment first. The starting point is the idea that the current system, because it works against biodiversity but fails to increase productivity, is broken. Instead, there should be a subsidy system that is only about filling in for market failure. That means public money for public goods – diversity, wildlife and environment – that the market does not value; agricultural subsidies, most of which are decided simply by how much land is farmed, should go to those that create the most public benefit.

For generations after 1945, governments put food security at the heart of agricultural policy. Thousands of miles of hedgerow were grubbed up, farming was increasingly industrialised, quantity replaced quality. Herbicides and pesticides had a catastrophic effect on wildlife, only exacerbated by the devastating loss of habitat. But it was the butter mountains and wine lakes as much as concern for biodiversity that finally stimulated a counter-revolution and began to pave the way towards schemes of environmental stewardship that are becoming visible to visitors to the countryside. Headlands have come back round arable fields. Hedges are being replanted. Native woodland is cherished again. It is now mainstream for farming organisations like the NFU to incorporate green policies in their advocacy.

But farming itself is in crisis. Dairy and grain prices are set by the global, not the local, market. What farmers are paid makes up only a small percentage of what we pay for food in shops. The buying power of supermarkets can force producers into bankruptcy, and production is increasingly concentrated in fewer, larger holdings. So, beneath its feelgood appeal to a greener landscape where land management is judged by its wider contribution to social wellbeing, the real question the NT is posing is where we want our food to come from. In a globalised world where Britain already imports about 40% of the food it consumes, maybe the old preoccupation with food security is outdated. There are more important things to consider.

Last year, the New Economic Foundation produced a provocative analysis of food production, Urgent Recall, arguing that if the real cost of unequal access to a healthy diet and its impact on obesity and social wellbeing was counted along with the cost of environmental damage, lost birds and disappearing butterflies, there would be a public outcry. Most people in Britain spend a smaller proportion of their income on food than in other rich countries. If it cost more, it would be valued more; subsidies would go not to farmers but in, say, income support.

The NT makes an ambitious and worthwhile argument: the evidence of a misaligned system of food production is evident at almost every stage – in polluted watercourses and compacted land, in horsemeat passed off as beef and foreign produce repackaged and traded as British, in gangmasters cruelly exploiting migrant labour, and the processing industry cheating on quality. Leaving the EU is an opportunity for a fundamental reset. But – as the NT director general Helen Ghosh, who will launch this policy, recognises – radical farm reform is a perilous road. It can be introduced only gradually.

The NT sets out a bold ambition. In the next few weeks, many other experts and the farmers themselves will join the debate. This is the first step on a long march.