
A neat, if alarming, explanation for the astonishing rise of political outsiders across the western world is the idea that we live in a “post-truth era”: one in which support for outsiders soars when they make preposterous claims that are obviously not true. In contrast, when those who are seen to be on the inside – elected politicians and policy experts – counter with informed assessments, their popularity slumps.
There is something in this. Uncontaminated by the complexities of power, the outsiders’ propositions are untested. They utter words to euphoric audiences, and do not implement policies that can fuel intense disillusionment and cries of betrayal. Yet the concept of the post-truth era is also dangerously untruthful in its implicit evocation of a recent past that was a glorious age of candour.




Post-truth politicians such as Donald Trump and Boris Johnson are no joke | Jonathan Freedland




The implication is untrue partly because it cannot be true. Truth in politics is always partly subjective, and rightly so. One person’s noble public spending commitment will be another’s reckless waste of taxpayers’ money. More importantly, the concept of the post-truth era obscures the main reason why mainstream parties have become so fragile.
In the new, traumatically constraining context of the globalised economy, mainstream parties on the left and the right have failed calamitously to find ways of telling the truth about what they can do, they want to do and they should do. Their failure to frame arguments based on an essence of truth gives space for the outsiders to flourish mendaciously.
Only a year ago in Britain a general election was contested on a scandalous untruth. George Osborne framed the election around his plans to wipe out the deficit in this parliament, a framing as tenuous in its relationship with the truth as Donald Trump’s plans to build a wall along the border with Mexico.
In the drama of post-Brexit events the chancellor announced almost casually that he had dropped the target he was never going to meet. Yet 12 months earlier the election was dominated by the deficit mistruth. Ed Miliband was forced, or felt he was forced, to make arguments he did not believe in order to appear “responsible” on spending. Miliband had to propose Osborne-like cuts or face accusations of tax bombshells. In order to appear even more “responsible” than Osborne in relation to the untruthful deficit target, Labour refused to commit even to the modest increases in NHS spending that the Conservatives had proposed. Privately, Labour’s leaders knew that they would have to spend much more, but they could not speak openly because they would be accused of spending recklessly rather than focusing on the deficit.
When Miliband did speak the truth on BBC’s pre-election Question Time, insisting that he did not accept that the spending of the last Labour government had caused the financial crash, his honesty was viewed widely as a fatal gaffe. He should have lied and played the untruthful game in which the profligacy of the past would be replaced by an Osborne-like stringency, even though Osborne had no idea how he would be so stringent without wrecking lives and the economy – and would later drop the whole objective. The entire election was based on a fantasy.
The false framing was obviously a disaster for the Labour party. It lost an election trying too hard to be like Osborne, even though the chancellor was not speaking the truth. The failure to frame a coherent pre-election left-of-centre argument in part explains the rise of Jeremy Corbyn.
Thanks to the ineptitude of his internal opponents Corbyn has been granted a second leadership contest to show that he could not dissemble if he tried – conveying to some a grizzled integrity, in contrast to those trapped into not being able to tell the truth. His platform is more solid than it was before the official start of the second contest now that a court has ruled that recently signed-up party members will be allowed to vote and more of Corbyn’s supporters have been elected to the party’s ruling national executive.
But the false framing of the fundamental economic argument has not proven to be a great triumph for Osborne. He is now on the backbenches, his deficit game-playing a device consigned to history as Theresa May gives the early impression at least of seeking a more balanced approach.
The biggest victim is the entire electorate, which has been unable to benefit from a grown-up debate about how we pay for public services, or to reach more nuanced conclusions about the priority that should be given to wiping out a deficit.
There is a mountain of other depressing examples that show the UK suffers when mainstream leaders are trapped in the pre-post-truth era that was also untruthful. Why was there so little preparation in Whitehall on the detailed implications of Brexit? Part of the answer is that the prime minister and others could not admit in public the obvious: that there was a possibility they might lose.




George Osborne scraps 2020 budget surplus plan




To be fair, if there had been evidence of extensive Brexit preparations the media would have gone for Cameron. I can hear the Today programme interviewer in such circumstances: “You insist you are going to win the referendum, and yet you are preparing for defeat!!!” The media make it much harder for mainstream leaders to stumble towards candour, especially for those on the left, but also to some extent for those on the right.
Yet it cannot be beyond the wit of a big political leader to move a little closer towards the truth, while accepting that guile and a capacity to dissemble expediently are also required skills for successful leadership.
Is it really impossible for a leader to state that if we want decent public services, we have to find ways of paying for them, and that cutting the deficit is not the only way of measuring the success of economy policy? Is it not possible for such questions to be framed in a way that hails an ideological divide between left and right, showing that there is more to mainstream politics than a technocratic battle between those who claim competence in contrast to their opponents’ incompetence?
If mainstream leaders do not find a way of expressing themselves and explaining why they act as they do, they will leave the stage to the outsiders who propose their post-truth absurdities before a more truthful era can be given a chance.
• Steve Richards presents Rock N Roll Politics at the Edinburgh Festival from 16 August

