
Comments aimed at the bisexual community during Monday night’s episode of Celebrity Big Brother shone a light on a problem that is often ignored but is deeply damaging. “The worst type, I’m afraid to say, are the bisexuals,” said Christopher Biggins. “What it is, is people not wanting to admit they’re gay. Be honest: that’s what you’ve got to be.”
This is a real issue – “bi-erasure” – both within and outside of the LGBT community, and comments about “choosing a side” or “being honest with yourself” are damaging and extremely hurtful for bi people.




Popular culture is still afraid of bisexuality | Owen Duffy




This is not new, or something that those people who have come out as bisexual have not had to face. This slur against bisexual people, that they’re either confused or lying, isn’t anything fresh. It is extremely hurtful and damaging but if you speak to any bi person, it’s nothing they haven’t heard, or feared, if they’ve been brave enough to come out and say:“I’m bi.” For those who haven’t come out, these slurs will only help to keep them firmly in the closet.
But while these words may have been extremely hard to hear, they have served a purpose by dragging biphobia into the limelight and showing that, like bi people, it really does exist. We as a society, as a community, including lesbian and gay people, need to acknowledge that biphobia is as damaging as homophobia. We also need to acknowledge that, quite often, lesbian and gay people are part of the problem in their steadfast refusal to believe bi people exist.
Coming out as bisexual can be extremely difficult for people. Stonewall research shows that 33% of gay men and 23% of lesbians are comfortable being out in the workplace. But only 12% of their bisexual peers feel the same way. At Stonewall we do everything we can to champion role models from across the lesbian, gay, bisexual and trans community. We know the power they can have in changing people’s hearts and minds.




The last bastion of prejudice | Gary Nunn




At our most recent Workplace Conference we had the privilege of hosting the CEO of Lloyds of London Inga Beale, as our keynote speaker. Her speech about her bisexual identity and what being an LGBT role model means to her was extremely powerful. I have no doubt that the people in that room had their minds opened by her standing up and talking with pride about being bisexual.
This year we have been continuing our ongoing work to help empower bisexual people to step up and be out and proud about their bi identity. We have hosted free bisexual role model courses, one in July and another coming up in September, specifically to support the bi community. These sessions enable people to discuss what their identity means to them, what it’s like being a bisexual person, the challenges they face, and to empower them to be role models and to stand up to biphobia.
As a charity we are here to achieve acceptance without exception for all of the LGBT community. That means we are here to ensure that whoever you are – lesbian, gay, bi or trans – we are here to help communities embrace and cherish diversity, no exceptions.

