
I’m off to the Calais refugee camp this weekend as part of a group from my constituency, delivering cars full of clothes and following others who have taken food to the camps. But all of us know that however well-intentioned such actions are, they are like shouting at the wind to stop blowing.
We hope to find a woman I met earlier in the summer to check on her welfare. Living in a caravan donated by the people of Walthamstow, she was eight months pregnant and jumping lorries to try to get to the UK. Her story isn’t unique or by far the worst. She’s stuck in this hell because there is a crisis of political will to act. What these people need is not just charity, but bureaucracy. And as politicians that’s our job.
Every day pressure is mounting. A makeshift set-up supposed to help 500 people now bursts with more than 10,000. They have fled conflicts in Sudan, the Taliban in Afghanistan, or the repressive regime in Eritrea. They are the Oromo of Ethiopia or the Kurds and Christians of Iraq. Men, women and children who have crossed mountains, oceans and multiple countries in pursuit of freedom. Now they are stuck in the nightmare that is the Calais “Jungle”.
By night, most are in the hands of smugglers, who chase down drivers to force them to take people across the Channel. By day, they dodge tear gas and rubber bullets – the crowd control of choice deployed by exasperated French authorities. Volunteers on the ground fear reprisals from the far right, who now dominate a town struggling to cope. Theresa May is talking tough on development spending cuts and border control, at the very time aid agencies are struggling to feed people here once a day.




 

Calais houses only a tiny fraction of the number of refugees in Europe




 

Calais houses only a tiny fraction of the number of refugees in Europe. Internationally, 65.3 million people are fleeing persecution. The vast majority are not in the wealthy nations panicking about being flooded, but in poorer, mainly Middle Eastern, African and south Asian countries. Jordan, a country of less than 7 million people, has taken in 656,000 Syrian refugees. Lebanon is protecting more than 1 million. Britain has welcomed just 2,800.
Refugee camps are not a long-term solution. But demolishing them or hoping other countries will deal with the problem because it isn’t happening on our soil isn’t a sustainable or honourable response. As signatories to the 1951 refugee convention, Britain should share responsibility for helping more people, not just in camps in poorer nations but across Europe too. That means providing more legal safe routes to sanctuary and funding the administrative mechanisms for people to access them.
With French presidential elections and Brexit on the horizon, the chances for working together to make this happen are disappearing fast. Those who say such schemes “pull” people to Europe seem blind to the evidence that without them they come anyway. Not everyone can or should come to the UK – some have family in other countries, others are not eligible for asylum – but all deserve a response to their request. At present many live in limbo and despair through a lack of any process to track them and help reunite them with their relatives, or resettle them in a new home nation. The programmes that do exist are piecemeal, or designed to justify pushing them back to places from which many will run again because they are still in danger. The only ones profiting from political intransigence to provide safe passage and resettlement are the smugglers, casually abandoning people to the seas or using threats of violence to double their price in their captive market.




Let’s dismantle the Calais camp – and smash this modern slave trade | Charlie Elphicke




Worse, children are at risk of trafficking. 10,000 refugee children have disappeared, and that was Europol’s best estimate in January. There is no uniform system of registration or protection, so they fall through the cracks. And while diplomats squabble, autumn approaches. The Calais camp census shows there are 608 unaccompanied children, sharing tents with strangers as there is no dedicated area for them. When the French authorities evicted part of the camp previously, 129 went missing.
When parliament passed the Alf Dubs amendment to help child refugees in April this year we trusted the government to put it into practice. But not a single child has yet come here under its auspices. When parliament returns on Monday we will table further new legislation to make good on our pledges and try to get these kids out of the camps by Christmas. Because all of us can do more to help those running from terror in their home nations than just shout at the sky – and that includes us, the politicians.

