
What a difference 500 years makes. When Henry VIII established a “master of the posts” in 1516, the service was strictly off limits to the public. Even horse-drawn mail coaches were hundreds of years in the future, along with stamps, red pillar boxes and uniformed postmen.
Today, Royal Mail’s progress over those 500 years will be marked by the Prince of Wales at a ceremony in the City of London. It’s a journey that’s surely worth celebrating. An unremarkable sinecure position became a mighty empire whose trademarks are now instantly recognisable – not just as symbols of a postal service, but as symbols of a nation. From Night Mail to Postman Pat, there’s no denying that British culture wouldn’t be the same without it. After meeting long-serving post workers and apprentices, Prince Charles and the Duchess of Cornwall will unveil a replica Penfold pillar box to stand in St Martin le Grand, outside the old General Post Office headquarters.




This cynical Royal Mail and Post Office divorce will bring only misery | Lindsey Mackie and Maurice Glasman




But amid the smiling faces and small talk, their royal highnesses are unlikely to hear the full story. Indeed, Britain’s postal system is in more of a mess than ever before. The Post Office – confusingly, still in state hands after Royal Mail privatisation – is facing a strike of up to 3,500 workers after 83% voted to walk out. Their decision came after it was announced 61 branches would be transferred to WH Smith – with fears of 2,000 job losses. And managers in Unite have also voted to strike in protest at threats to their pension.
When Royal Mail was floated on the stock market in 2013, demand for shares was huge. The government was slated by MPs for hugely undervaluing what looked to be a comfortably profitable venture. But optimism hasn’t lasted, with profits falling by a third this year. And while this time bosses have blamed “modernisation” costs, there are deeper problems with the model of liberalised post. While Royal Mail’s universal service obligation requires it to deliver to every UK address for the same price, private competitors can “cherry pick” lucrative routes and take advantage of the former state company’s cheap rates elsewhere. Whistl’s backing out of the “final mile” delivery market offers a reprieve, but how long this lasts is another matter.
Inevitably, some will pipe up to say that in the digital age, Royal Mail should be consigned to the history books and the tourist trail. It’s true that the internet has led to a sharp, steady reduction in letter volumes – down 2% in the most recent figures. But online shopping means more parcels are being sent than ever before (up 2%), and Royal Mail’s European parcels division GLS has seen its revenue soar (up 13%).
So aside from the job cuts, what has “modernisation” meant for the post? Deliveries have been repeatedly cut and Sunday postbox collections are no more. A first-class stamp now costs 64p – it would be 43p if prices had risen with inflation since 2006. The service is split down the middle in a plan that seems as nonsensical as the separation of track and train when the railways were privatised. Next-day delivery is considered a privilege to pay through the roof for. We’re expected to believe that WH Smith will provide the same level of service as the big high-street crown post offices the chain will subsume. And perhaps most scandalously of all, it will be private investors who benefit from the sale of Royal Mail’s extensive property portfolio. That’s thanks to the work of private consultants who handled the 2013 sell-off, and stood to benefit from it too.
The other group to suffer for the sake of markets, mismanagement and corporate profits are, naturally, the remaining staff. As well as the closures, job losses and franchising, Post Office workers also face a threat to their “simply unaffordable” pensions. With Royal Mail bosses making similar noises, both divisions of the split service could soon be out on the picket lines.
Ministers are keen to stay out of the current dispute, hoping we’ll forget the government still owns the Post Office. But Tories, Liberal Democrats and Labour alike must face up to their abject failure to create a postal system fit for the 21st century. Instead, they’ve allowed it to be relentlessly asset-stripped and run down in a spirit of managed decline. The Communication Workers Union says the Post Office is on the “path to extinction”. Perhaps it should be no surprise that Royal Mail is keen to fall back on its proud history when its present and future is such an embarrassment.

