
For a brief, wonderful moment it looked as if Labour might not manage to hold a conference at all this year, having failed to find a private security firm. That would have been the ultimate symbol of the party’s near-terminal meltdown. As the conference goes ahead in Liverpool this weekend after all, note how fundamentally uninterested Labour’s current leadership seems in the real crisis facing the country: the slow-motion cataclysm of Brexit.




Corbyn should have been given longer before being challenged, says Owen Smith - Politics live




The spectacle of a riven party in what may be its death throes will be grisly sport for all Labour’s enemies. Expect a sea of venom swilling around the floor among delegates. Wild cheering and leader adulation may drown out the paralysing despair of those who wonder, along with former leader Neil Kinnock, if they will ever again see a Labour government in their lifetime. Triumphal videos of mass rallies will strive to blank out where the party stands: worst ever council election results and worst opinion polls for a Labour opposition leader’s first year. Michael Foot stood at -24, Ed Miliband and Neil Kinnock both at -7, while Jeremy Corbyn is on -36. (Tony Blair polled +27.)
Owen Smith supporters glumly hope he can knock some points off Corbyn’s 59.5% result last time. Psychologically, they feel getting over 40% gives them a standing. At their phone banks calling Labour members, some Smithite MPs say they are getting better results than reported; others fear the worst. Two quite separate parties cohabit under one title, each accusing the other of betraying all Labour exists for. Polls show Corbyn scores -36 among pre-2015 Labour members, but +72 among later joiners. That’s how far the old Labour party has been swallowed up by newcomers from elsewhere. But it’s far too late to mourn the misjudgments that let it happen.
Those 172 rebel MPs see clearly how Corbyn’s team is set on deselections, made providentially easy by boundary changes. The more Corbyn floats in a miasma buoyed up by intoxicating rallies, the more they resent the blind eye turned to his cohort’s threats and the torrents of abuse they have unleashed.
The 172 are by no means united on what to do next, but if they don’t stand together they risk being picked off one by one: few think Corbyn “reaching out” will save them from Momentum in their own back yards. Corbyn intends to seize total control of the party by having his shadow cabinet selected a third by himself and a third by the members who will vote for his slate, overriding a token third of MPs’ votes. In the name of “democracy” he would give members policymaking votes too, the likely results of which would be fantasy budgets and manifestos. This would signify the end of representative democracy, with “elite” MPs usurped by rule by referendum from an unaccountable click-ocracy.









If you’ve enjoyed our Labour & Liverpool coverage, then support us


Such rule changes rely on the national executive committee, which is not quite in Corbyn’s control. Tom Watson’s attempt to return to a shadow cabinet elected mainly by MPs may succeed. But would the 172 stand for these positions? Some are adamant they wouldn’t; others will because, crucially, with the shadow cabinet positions come an extra three seats on the NEC, ruling out the Bennite/Robespierre rule by members that Corbyn seeks.
What will the refuseniks do? They won’t split: Labour failed to reform an electoral system that kills any who try. Get serious, is the answer. Return to real politics. Stop obsessing about the party issues and devote your considerable talent and experience to the one thing that really matters – the fast-approaching catastrophe of Brexit. It’s for the 172 MPs to fill empty space where Labour should be campaigning hard to rescue the country from the grip of vandals causing maximum mayhem.
Across the house, the Brexiteers are doubling down on their success, with Boris Johnson joining the new “hard Brexit” Change Britain group, alongside the Leave Means Leave group. With Liam Fox and David Davis they are rejecting the single market. All statements from EU leaders make it increasingly clear that there is no cake-and-eat-it option, no “unique British model” on offer; and the full force of the likely damage is dawning on one business sector after another. Brexit advocates crassly gloat: “Look! The economy is doing fine!” But nothing has happened yet. Philip Hammond, the silent chancellor, lets the Financial Times know that he wants to keep as close as possible to the single market and the customs union. Defying clean breakers he is “not afraid to highlight the risks to the economy of Brexit”.
Danger ahead grows as the Visegrad group countries – Slovakia, Poland, Hungary and the Czech Republic – say they will tolerate no UK deal that curtails free movement. Jean-Claude Juncker, the European commission president, doesn’t see “any possibility of compromise”, merely stating the obvious, since all 27 countries plus the European parliament have to agree the deal. One thing unites them – the determination to warn others against leaving by making sure Britain will be worse off out.




Momentum Kids – where childcare meets leftwing activism




The lies of the hard Brexiteers continue, even while their claims are exploded. Of our exports, 44% go to the EU, but only between 8% and 17% of their exports come to us. It becomes frighteningly apparent that our finance industry will be struck badly if prevented from trading inside the single market, obliging many to shift to Frankfurt. Rebalancing our dependency on finance is not best done by wrecking it, with no substitute. Hammond was no Europhile, but any chancellor would be horrified at this loss of revenue. British manufacturers are similarly alarmed: the EEF, their umbrella group, warned this week that they “must have ongoing access to the single market … and be able to employ and deploy staff from and across the EU”.
That’s whose side Labour must be on: Smith made that central to his campaign. If Corbyn and John McDonnell are supremely uninterested, the 172 must be the Labour campaign for all who will suffer from Brexit. It’s for them to stand against the ideological saboteurs Theresa May recklessly put in charge of the negotiations. The 172 must put Labour on the side of those at risk of losing jobs and businesses. The Lib Dems are saying as much, but what use is a rump of eight MPs? Labour’s 172 should define themselves not as a warring Labour faction, but as standard bearers for the nation’s pro-EU 48%.

