
From the time Brazil were awarded the 2016 Olympic and Paralympic Games, when they were handed the Olympic flag, they knew the world would be watching. When you are preparing to have visitors you must budget for it, and Brazil has had seven years to plan. Yet athletes from 50 of the world’s poorest nations are at risk of missing the Paralympics in September because the organisers have not yet paid travel grants. We are talking about funding when we should be discussing how to make the Paralympics better than they were in 2012. It breaks my heart – if these nations don’t get to the Paralympics we will have killed so many dreams.




Paralympic Games: countries still waiting for vital travel grants




It starts with discrimination and prejudice. When discrimination is there, the allocation of funds is different and somebody gets priority over others. To me, as a disabled woman, that is what is happening to people with disabilities all over the world. We don’t get priority and that’s why we are still fighting.
People with disabilities can feel like outcasts. Growing up in Kenya as a polio survivor I moved on heavy crutches and calipers, dragging or pulling myself along. The stigma is so prevalent. Yet flying the flag for Kenya at the Athens Paralympics in 2004 I never wanted to forget where I came from. When I went back to Kenya afterwards everybody was talking about me, this girl who could race in a wheelchair. I decided then that I was given this stage for a reason – to empower other people. Now many young people from Africa are racing in wheelchairs, not just from Kenya but Nigeria, Ghana, and South Africa.
I came into sport relatively late in life. I sat in a wheelchair for the first time when I was pregnant with my child in 2001. I was introduced to sport when I went to the gym because I wanted to lose weight after giving birth. It wasn’t about medals. I was motivated by the fact that I could sit in a racing chair and go at speed – something I’d never done and never dreamed of doing. I love the feeling of speed. I love cars, and for me wheelchair racing is like Formula One, with the same fierce pushing and taking bends at speed.
You think of people who bring something unique to sport. For me in 2004 Chantal Petitclerc brought glamour to Paralympic sport. Then in 2008 we had David Weir, and in 2012 he was our Usain Bolt. He just said to the world: “I will show you how it is done.” With the support these athletes were given, and with the support developing nations were given, athletes came and were able to perform. We should be proud of what we achieved in London in 2012, when people started to look at us as fully fledged athletes. The world has a lot to learn from 2012 – they should ask for the notes. Sport is the only language everyone can speak. Whether you are tall and a superstar like Usain Bolt, or whether you are racing in a wheelchair, everyone understands.




Empty seats, unpaid travel and low ticket sales: fears for Rio’s Paralympics




Now many countries and charities such as Leonard Cheshire Disability are using sport as a means of advocating for inclusion in education and other areas.
In 2012 we supported the first ever Paralympians from Haiti and the Democratic Republic of the Congo. When Haitian Paralympians returned home, everyone who had watched them on big screens began to talk about how sport can be empowering. The experience of participation can feel magical. Through sport, friendships are formed, and athletes’ exposure on an international stage helps build self-esteem. It enables people to stop looking down on themselves and feeling self-pity.
Some of these athletes really struggle. Lacking proper equipment, they can’t compete on an even playing field but they still feel proud to wear the colours of their countries. When their stories of success make the headlines, it causes people who might have stigmatised or ostracised them to appreciate them as positive contributors to society. I can’t imagine the shock that has hit the affected athletes. They have worked for four years, made the teams, and sacrificed so much – only to be told they are likely to miss going to Rio after all, because money intended for the Paralympics has been spent elsewhere. We have come a long way and we must not allow ourselves to step backwards – instead we should be making a giant leap forwards.

