
Malcolm Turnbull’s decision to call a double dissolution has brought Pauline Hanson back to the centre of Australian political life, with an influence amplified by the four votes her One Nation party now holds in a finely balanced Senate.
For evidence of the political disruption One Nationis already wreaking, look no further than the federal Coalition’s decision to block the New South Wales Coalition’s sale of the NSW electricity network to Chinese buyers.
But it’s not just the hard power One Nation is wielding in the Senate that will redefine Australian politics over the next three years, polling conducted by Essential suggests support for One Nation runs far deeper than their current vote indicates.




Peter Dutton attacks Guardian and ABC over reporting of Nauru files




While One Nation polled 4.3% nationally, cracking 9% in Queensland, even more Australians identify with the One Nation’s gumbo of White Australia redux, industry protection and downward envy.
Take the following results, for example: 
 

One Nation poll

There is a stark contrast in today’s reception to the one she received when she burst onto the national stage as a politically incorrect, dis-endorsed Liberal candidate in John Howard’s “For all of us” election win 20 years ago.
Then the major parties marginalised her over her calls to end Asian immigration, the media ridiculed her, and she was met with a cultural backlash that peaked with a tribute drag queen.
Her rhetoric has now shifted from Asian to Muslim immigration, and the response from the political establishment is worlds apart too.
This time around, the major parties recognise they will need to engage and deal with Hanson rather than shun her, the PM has reached out and the labour movement is already lobbying, recognising areas of common ground.
Breakfast show hosts give their tacit approval as the libertarian right sees her as a living example of their cause while the protectionist left see hope she can soften the government’s neoliberal edges.
Twenty years after the initial rise and subsequent flameout, the times suit Pauline Hanson’s One Nation.
In this era of fact-free political debate, Malcolm Roberts can flaunt his empirical denials with little censure, the social media echo chamber now unmediated by gatekeepers.
And despite the imagery of the fight, the major parties are closer than ever on their economic fundamentals – free trade, balanced budgets, population growth driving growth and prosperity – leaving a gaping hole in the market.
We’ve seen the rise of the outsider overseas, from Brexit to Le Pen to Trump and Sanders. One Nation is poised to become Australia’s expression of that international pushback on globalisation. 
Our polling shows that in 2016, Australians are evenly split on whether the globalisation project has been good for their country.
Globalisation is the increase of trade, communication, travel and other things among countries around the world. In general, do you think Australia has gained more or lost more because of globalisation?

Do you think Australia has gained more or lost more because of globalisation?

 That’s the full package – the ability to travel, to trade, to reduce the barriers of the nation-state and create a closer world. And fewer than three in 10 of us reckon that’s been a good thing.




What you need to know about One Nation's Malcolm Roberts and ‘sovereign citizens’ | Jason Wilson




Alarmingly for the major parties that have championed globalisation, the majority of their voters are not behind them. Counter-intuitively, it’s only Green voters, whose policies have challenged the orthodoxy form the left, who see an upside.
Even more telling is the demographic breakdown – if you are young, educated or wealthy, you are much more likely to support the globalisation project. But if you are older and struggling you can’t see the benefits because you are not living them.
When someone tells you they can wind back globalisation, they are giving you the story you want to hear. And that’s why Pauline Hanson’s One Nation is not an aberration that can be isolated and cauterised this time around.
Peter Lewis is an executive director of Essential.

