The Southern rail franchise and the RMT rail union can often seem to deserve one another. The former talks as if irrational union obduracy is the only problem on the rail network when that is manifestly not the case. In Southern’s narrative, only the RMT’s blind defence of its members’ jobs stands in the way of an efficient and affordable modern rail system for thousands of commuters heading into London from Kent, Surrey and Sussex. Few who use the network will swallow that.

The union, by contrast, can sometimes talk as if only the rail employers ever act unreasonably. This is an equally absurd claim, especially this week, as the RMT conducts a five-day strike across the Southern network. In the union version, only the selfless devotion to public safety of the RMT stands between Britain and a rail system in which passengers’ lives are casually and cynically sacrificed to profit. This is not a view that many others would recognise either.

The ticket-buying public who are actually caught up in the Southern v RMT dispute can be forgiven for thinking that they are not being best served by either the company or the union. Commuters, many of whom pay several thousand pounds for their annual season tickets, have had a lousy service from Southern for months. For them, this week’s strike simply means the worsening of an already stressful and unpredictable battle to get into work. They deserve better.

Southern trains crisis: seven factors that threw services off the rails Read more

Yet for all the posturing and selective argument that sometimes afflicts both sides in a dispute with nationwide implications, there can be little doubt where the public interest actually lies. The plain fact is that most passenger trains, especially on such a crowded network as Southern’s, will provide a better service to the public if they carry a member of the rail staff whose duties may include ticketing, customer service and dealing with safety and emergencies.

Staffing of this kind is routine on long-distance services. But while Southern has pledged to keep a second crew member for now, the practice is rare on local and commuter trains, which are often far more crowded, and in the era of driver-only operated trains becoming rarer still. Insofar as this week’s five-day RMT strike against Southern is truly about this core issue for passengers, the case for a second staff presence is strong and deserves support.

Yet however desirable both jobs and safety are, they cost money. That is a reality, and would continue to be one, whether the network was in public or private hands. Public discontent with high fares has pushed the government to press for cost cuts in rail franchises, as the Southern case starkly shows. Anyone who uses the commuter services in any part of the country is daily aware that, alongside new investment in trains, the franchise system is straining at the seams. Voters in less well-off parts of Britain may not see why the southeast deserves more support from a stretched public purse.

There are also some serious practical arguments against all trains always having both a driver and a guard. In some cases, driver-only operation represents no threat to safety. The claim that only an on-board guard should ever be responsible for closing the doors is hard to justify if drivers can also do this job. Much depends on variables like the modernity of the rolling stock and how busy a particular line or station is at particular times of day.

Nevertheless, a similar dispute between the RMT and ScotRail has just been scaled back, though not yet settled, after both sides made concessions and agreed to talk. They did so because of an acceptance in principle that guards have a modern role. There is no reason why Southern should not do what ScotRail has done. And no reason why the UK government should not do what the Scottish government did there, and put pressure on both sides to get round the table to protect the interests of passengers and the wider economy. The priority should be support for passengers, not battling the unions.