It’s odd that so many people still think that lesbian, gay, bi and trans equality has been won. Homophobic hate crimes are on the rise, trans people still face legal barriers that prevent them from being able to fully be themselves and more than 75,000 young people experienced bullying last year for “being gay”.

But discrimination comes in many forms. It’s not always in the shape of a law, a physical attack or targeted bullying. Sometimes it’s a matter of throwaway words that go unnoticed by everyone but the person they’re directed at – unless, of course, they’re captured on camera in front of millions of viewers.

Last night at the Rio Olympics, the camera panned around the crowd for a “kiss-cam” and a BBC commentator exclaimed, “I hope it doesn’t zoom in on two blokes!”

This is a classic example of the kind of comments that are still so commonplace in everyday conversations and which continue to polarise gay and bi people and erase them from mainstream society. How many times have you heard the word “gay” used as an adjective to describe anything that isn’t good? Ever caught the disapproving glimpse of someone walking towards you down the street, and made the decision to stop holding your partner’s hand? Or have you been asked if you meant to book a double bed, rather than two singles, when booking a B&B in you and your partner’s name?

In pictures: Pride in London 2016







10 show all In pictures: Pride in London 2016

















1/10 Pride in London Participants on motor cycles during the Pride in London parade, as it makes its way through the streets of central, London. AFP/Getty Images

2/10 Pride in London Daphne, a miniture schnouzer, wears a rainbow tie at a march as the LGBT community celebrates Pride in London on June 25, 2016 Getty Images

3/10 Pride in London Jennifer Saunders (right) and Joanna Lumley (left) pose in character along with performers in front of the Absolutely Fabulous/Stolli (vodka) Pride in London float PA

4/10 Pride in London 'Pet Play' enthusiasts dress and behave as dogs during a march as the LGBT community celebrates Pride in London on June 25, 2016 Getty Images

5/10 Pride in London A policeman kisses his fiance after proposing to him during the Pride in London parade, as it makes its way through the streets of central London. PA

6/10 Pride in London Participants show their support for victims of the Orlando shooting during the annual Pride Parade in London on June 25, 2016. AFP/Getty Images

7/10 Pride in London United States Ambassador to the United Kingdom Matthew Barzun (left) and Major of London Sadiq Khan attending the Pride in London parade PA

8/10 Pride in London Participants take part in the annual Pride Parade in London on June 25, 2016. AFP/Getty Images

9/10 Pride in London Participants take part in the annual Pride Parade in London on June 25, 2016. AFP/Getty Images

10/10 Pride in London Participants show their support for victims of the Orlando shooting during the annual Pride Parade in London on June 25, 2016. AFP/Getty Images

I know I have – and plenty of other people from the lesbian, gay, bi and trans community have too. A doctor once told me that it’s “just the gays” who tend to test positive for STIs at her health centre. I wonder if she knew that I had boyfriend.

What’s worse is that it’s not just the ignorant or the bigoted that use this sort of language and act in this sort of way. In fact, it’s pretty rife within the lesbian, gay, bi and trans community too. When a group of gay men say they “can’t stand lesbians”, they are being just as homophobic as a group of straight men that say they “can’t stand gays”.

Regardless of your own identity, everyday homophobia is wrong, whether it comes in the form of erasure, exclusion, contempt or a combination of all three. And homophobia can happen in the most unsuspecting spaces – even when you’re doing your weekly shop. We all have a role to play in calling this kind of behaviour out and offering support to those we witness experiencing it.

We’ve learned this week, with both the BBC and Sainsbury’s, that corporations can get it wrong too. Trusted brands that employ LGBT people and have LGBT customers must not be complacent. That’s the only way we continue working toward a world where everyone, everywhere is accepted without exception.

Matt Horwood is a senior communications officer at the LGBT rights charity Stonewall