The idea of a refugee or a displaced person means different things to different people. But the human suffering they encompass is often much the same. Europeans might envisage families in leaky boats adrift in the Mediterranean, or quietly determined crowds trekking northwards along highways. For people in the Middle East, it might be row upon row of tents in a refugee camp; for Africans, stories of men, women and children trafficked across the Sahel, only to end up in a sordid detention centre run by militias in Libya. In Asia, it might be desperate boat people being turned back, or the island camps where those who hope to find a new life in Australia find themselves detained.

Across the globe, the 21st century has become an era of disruption and exodus. An unprecedented 65 million people are fleeing war or persecution, or migrating in search of training, an education or a job. The response is asymmetrical: most refugees only go as far as a neighbouring country. According to Britain’s Refugee Council, 44% of refugees are in the Middle East and Africa, and 27% in Europe. Turkey, Pakistan and Lebanon are all sheltering more than 1 million from Syria and Afghanistan. The UK, according to the UNHCR, hosts about 170,000.

And beyond the human trauma, there are the geopolitical consequences. The stability of democracies is jeopardised when scenes of chaotic population movements fuel demagoguery and populism; authoritarian regimes or their proxies exploit refugee flows as weapons of war to destabilise adversaries whose resources will be suddenly stretched, or as a technique to score points in a diplomatic negotiation. Against that backdrop, a UN summit devoted to the crisis can only be applauded – especially considering the topic had never been addressed before in a diplomatic gathering of all nations. Yet to many, today’s event in New York turned out to be a disappointment.

It is more than 60 years since the world agreed that such huge population flows were a matter of global responsibility. Now the Geneva convention on refugees, signed by 144 states in 1951, is facing a profound threat as politicians respond to domestic pressure by looking for ways to evade its obligations. Across the world, the power of a global moral imperative is being undermined by the rise of nationalism and identity politics, driven partly by a traditional fear of the other, partly by the impact of recession on governments’ capacity to provide public services.

At the UN this week, there will be much empathy and little concrete action. The great hope of the NGOs and other humanitarian lobbyists was for a commitment for the global north to resettle 10% of the world’s refugees. Instead, although the text of what is to be known as the New York declaration recognises the scale of the crisis, it fails to lay out concrete measures. Signatories are asked to continue to work towards a global compact to be reached by 2018. Whether the second summit, convened by President Obama, will do any better seems uncertain. Its objective is to encourage individual state pledges of aid to refugees, not develop a global strategy.

All of this leaves unaddressed the no less important matter of preventing or resolving the conflicts that drive mass migration. Hopes for a ceasefire in Syria have all but dwindled. Alone, this conflict has forced 12 million people from their homes in the last five years.

The wider picture is that politicians across the world feel little incentive to act – after all, refugees have no voice, no vote, and scant organisation. The moral commitment to them was made in the aftermath of what the world’s leaders thought was an unrepeatable catastrophe. It was not supposed to happen again. In that context, small as the results of the refugee summit appear, the mere restatement of the commitment was a small victory. Now President Obama will hope at least to incentivise some positive action.

But here’s the paradox: political leaders won’t reduce the risks they fear for themselves (and their careers) by sitting idle in the face of an unprecedented exodus. Creating safe channels for refugees and organising migration routes, not building fences, may be a better way. It has been tried before. Thirty years ago, hundreds of thousands of Vietnamese boat people were saved by a coordinated and comprehensive plan. Globalisation increases mobility. Instead of resisting it, nations should consider organising it. Save lives, rather than creating conditions that only aid the people smugglers. Inaction breeds more chaos, not less.