In the late 1950s, large numbers of Chinese people became convinced sparrows were devouring grain seed and causing devastating famines.

All over China farmers and city folk began to persecute sparrows. They raided nests, killing chicks. They banged drums and cymbals to frighten the birds whenever they tried to land. The creatures eventually dropped out of the sky from exhaustion. The species was more or less wiped out in China.

But the anti-sparrow campaign was based on a lie.

The birds were not the cause of China’s crop failures. In fact, the slaughter of the birds contributed to an insect blight which made the famine still worse.

The great Chinese sparrow persecution is a reminder that a population can passionately believe something that simply isn’t true.

So how should the Chinese authorities have reacted to that popular conviction that sparrows were the cause of their misery? Should they have firmly told the people that there was no scientific evidence to support the theory that sparrows were causing famine and urged them to cease the irrational persecution?

Or would that have been patronising and counterproductive? Should the widespread belief have been humoured? Should the Chinese have been told that, yes, sparrows were indeed a menace and that it made sense to reduce their numbers?

10 things immigration has done for Britain







10 show all 10 things immigration has done for Britain

















1/10 The Mini The 1959 classic, that is, perhaps our greatest piece of industrial design, a miracle of packaging and revolution in motoring. Its genius designer was Sir Alec Issigonis, who was an asylum seeker. His family, Greek, fled Smyrna when Turks invaded this borderland in around 1920, and he wound up studying engineering at Battersea Polytechnic. He went on to create that most English of motor cars, the Morris Minor, as well as the Austin-Morris 1100, all much loved products of his fertile imagination. Getty Images

2/10 Marks and Spencer Once upon a time there was no M&S in Britain, difficult as that may be to believe. We have one Michael Marks to thank for our most famous retailer, and he was a refugee from Belarus, arriving in England in about 1882, and soon after set off to flog stuff around Yorkshire. He eventually teamed with Thomas Spencer to create the vast business we know today. Getty Images

3/10 Thunderbirds And many other TV shows created, funded and otherwise produced by that largest of larger-than-life characters, Lew Grade (also a world class tap dancer). The man who dominated commercial television gave us memorable entertainment such as The Prisoner, the Saint and brought the Muppets to Britain (a sort of fuzzy felt wave of immigration), as well as puppet shows where you could see the strings. All this from a penniless Jew from Ukraine, born Lev Winogradsky, who escaped the pogroms in Ukraine with his family in the 1890s. His nephew Michael Grade has also done his bit for British television. Rex Features

4/10 The House of Windsor Or the House of Saxe-Coburg-Gotha until George V prudently rebranded the family during the First World War. Well, our royals are a pretty German bunch, as well as having various types of French and other alien blue blood coursing around their veins. ‘Twas ever thus. There was William the Conqueror, Norman French, who certainly broke the immigration rules; William of Orange, a direct import from Holland; the Hanoverian King Georges, the first barely able to speak English; Queen Victoria, who married a German, Edward VII, who couldn’t stay faithful to his wife, a Danish princess; George V wed another German princess; Edward VIII married an American (though she hardly visited England and prompted his emigration and exile); and the Queen is married to man born in Corfu. The embodiment of the British nation, to many, but one thinks of them as quite multicultural really. Getty Images

5/10 I Vow To Thee My Country Our most patriotic hymn was the product of a man named Gustav Holst (pictured), born in Cheltenham, but of varied Swedish, Latvian and German ancestry, who adapted part of his suite The Planets to put a particularly stirring and beautiful poem to music, just after the Great War. As the second verse has it, “there's another country/I've heard of long ago/Most dear to them that love her/most great to them that know”. Imagine if the Holst family had been kept out because the quota on musical European types had been reached. Creative Commons

6/10 Curry and Cobra Chicken Tikka Masala is, so they say, a dish which not only the most popular in Britain but specifically designed to cater for European tastes. For that we probably have to thank an Indian migrant, Sake Dean Mahomed, who came from Bengal to open the first recognisable Indian restaurant, the magnificently named “Hindoostanee Coffee House”. History does not record if a plate of poppadoms and accompanying selection of pickles and yoghurts were routinely placed on the table for new diners, but we do know that we had to wait until 1989 to taste the ideal lager for a curry - Cobra. That brew was brought to us by Karan (now Lord) Bilimoria, a Cambridge law graduate who hailed from Hyderabad. Getty Images

7/10 That big red swirly sculpture at the Olympic Park Or Orbit, to give it its proper name, the work of Anish Kapoor, who arrived in 1973 from India and had the artistic imagination to fill a power station. Getty Images

8/10 The Sun Love it or hate it, and many do both, this has been a symbol of much that is successful and a lot that is awful in British journalism since its inception in 1969. In its turn it spawned the Page 3 Girl and some nastily xenophobic headlines. All the stranger when you consider its creator was, of course, Rupert Murdoch, born 11 March 1931 in Melbourne, Australia. Getty Images

9/10 Marxism OK, Karl Marx’s philosophy was not much of a gift to the world, but for a while it seemed like a good idea. Though we might not dare admit it, Marxism still has a few insights to offer to anyone wanting to understand the workings of capitalism, though too few to excuse everything that was done in its name. Born in Germany spent much time in the British museum and the British pub, buried Highgate Cemetery. Oddly, his ideas never really caught on in his adopted homeland. Getty Images

10/10 The NHS They came from many, many backgrounds, including Ireland, the Philippines, east Europe, the Indian subcontinent, and Africa, as they still do, but the contribution of the black nurses who came to the UK from the Caribbean to heal and care for is a debt of honour that must be recognised. It so sometimes forgotten that it was Enoch Powell, then Minister of Health (1960-62), who campaigned to recruit their skilled nurses to come and work over here. One abiding legacy we can thank Enoch for. Getty Images

That may sound ridiculous. Yet there is a growing branch of liberal opinion which suggests British politicians, pundits and intellectuals should let people assert things which are not true.

The academic evidence we have is very clear that immigration does not undermine average UK living standards, but actually enhances them. Some researchers have found that there is a negative impact on the wages of unskilled natives – but only a mild one. Overall the impact is positive.

Yet some on the liberal left, despite acknowledging this evidence, are moving to the view that telling people that they’re wrong when they complain of a negative economic impact of immigration is condescending.

To outline what the academic research shows on migration “comes across as either an accusation of stupidity or a symptom of elite arrogance”, as one newspaper commentator puts it.

“Telling someone ‘you’re wrong, here are the facts’ only alienates them further” the think tank British Future has argued. The suggestion is that there should be less stress on what the evidence shows and much more on engaging people in a conversation.

The critique misdiagnoses the illness. The dominant reason people believe myths about the negative impact of immigration is not because they dislike being talked down to by arrogant metropolitan liberals, but because they’re incessantly fed those beguiling stories by the right-wing media and they are not properly rebutted by mainstream politicians.

And why? In a column last week my colleague John Rentoul quoted the old Soviet leader Leonid Brezhnev (as recalled by Richard Nixon): “If the people see an imaginary river out there, you don’t tell them there’s no river there, you build an imaginary bridge over the imaginary river. That would be a politically successful strategy.”

But while imaginary bridge building can sometimes deliver short -term relief for politicians, in the long term it’s often destructive.

Consider David Cameron’s infamous pledge to reduce net migration rates to the “tens of thousands” to assuage public anxiety on the subject. This crude target was always unlikely to be hit and the policy failure ended up reinforcing public anger over immigration that helped deliver the Brexit result.

Some will find the comparison between the Chinese sparrow persecution and the anti-immigration sentiment in Britain today flawed, perhaps even offensive. The Chinese authorities were never going to tell the truth about sparrows because they were the ones misinforming people.

Mao Zedong orchestrated the campaign to distract from his other catastrophic mistakes in the Great Leap Forward.

And 21st century Britain is a democracy, not a totalitarian state. People can make up their own minds can't they?

Yet the differences are not as great as we’d like to think. People have been sold a simple but incorrect story that their economic grievances stem from an influx of foreigners. And despite clear evidence that curbing migration will actually damage our prosperity and make people worse off, Theresa May is now preparing to set government policy as if this story is substantially true.

Aylan Kurdi, one year on – EU states failing in their obligations to refugees

One of the barriers to a country like Britain descending into the totalitarian abyss of China in the 1950s is that we have political leaders and a media (or at least part of it) that tell the truth and a culture of respect for scientific evidence. To diminish the truth-telling diminishes the barrier.

Democracies are not, sadly, inherently immune to the virus of ignorant and dead-end populism. Look at what is happening across the Atlantic where Donald Trump’s lies and conspiracy theories have taken hold of the minds of a distressingly large number of Americans.

It’s true that politicians should not label all people who voice concerns about immigration as either racist or stupid. It’s also sensible to address the underlying anxieties that many people have when they talk about immigration, such as stagnant wages, insecurity at work, pressure on public services and a shortage of housing. Localised infrastructure stresses and community integration issues should, of course, be taken seriously.

But to downplay scientific evidence, or to tacitly admit that there is some element of truth in the myths that immigrants make natives economically worse off is folly and will ultimately do more harm than good.

The central problem with the national debate over immigration in the UK is not that the truth is off-putting but that it simply isn’t heard enough. And liberals should never be reticent or ashamed about telling it as it is.