
“In space no one can hear you scream.” It’s the chilling tagline to Ridley Scott’s classic sci-fi horror, Alien. Last Friday, as I and 30 others read aloud for 10 hours from more than 2,000 leaked incident reports of the Nauru files published by Guardian Australia earlier this month, the line came back to me. What I and my fellow protesters read was, put simply, a chronology of trauma that is actual people’s daily existence. If the Australian government has its way, the hell that these asylum seekers are living through will remain indefinite. And, up until now, few of us have even heard of the island.
Just eight square miles in area, with its nearest neighbour 186 miles away, Nauru is a dot in the Pacific Ocean, located in the middle of nowhere. Here, the Australian government had, until the leak, been able to stifle the tortured screams of Nauru’s detained asylum seekers. This is why I took part in the action: to voice the degradation, abuse and self-harm that is the day-to-day life of people who are in search of safety, have committed no crimes and are already traumatised.




Nauru files: leaked reports read aloud in 10-hour vigil outside Australia House in London




The irony of Nauru once being named Pleasant Island only adds to the chilling association its name now carries. It is almost as if anything is worth the cost of, to quote Guardian Australia journalist David Marr, “detaining refugees out there” so that “the boats stop coming here”. Our own humanity seems a fair enough price to pay.
I say our, because Europe more broadly and the UK in particular subscribes to such merciless thinking. The tabled deal between the EU and Turkey, to return asylum seekers to the latter, is a clear example, so much so that Amnesty International calls it “unconscionable” and “illegal”. And still the bodies continue to wash up on Europe’s shores. Last week the Express reported that this year there has been a 37% increase in the numbers of migrants missing or dying at sea.
In the UK, Calais is all but in name an offshore detention centre like Nauru. Earlier this month the campaign group Citizens UK revealed it had identified 170 unaccompanied child asylum seekers all of whom had a legal right to be reunited with their families in the UK while having their claim processed. Rather than treat the matter of already traumatised children made to live in squalor, vulnerable to sexual exploitation and violence with the urgency it deserves, we instead have a system in which it is permissible to let them languish in misery.
Even closer to home we have our 10 immigration removal centres, holding nearly 30,000 people under the Immigration Act. Seeking asylum is an administrative process, not a criminal one, and yet we seem confused by this simple distinction; those most commonly held in detention are asylum seekers. The now notorious Yarl’s Wood detention centre was, last year, dubbed a “place of national concern” by the chief prison officer. Broadspectrum, the corporation Australia has outsourced its immigration detention to in Nauru, and Serco, managing Yarl’s Wood, share the ignominy of being seen to provide poor living conditions for the asylum seekers they detain.




The Nauru files: cache of 2,000 leaked reports reveal scale of abuse of children in Australian offshore detention




In June the Home Office refused to disclose whether any of the female detainees at the Bedfordshire detention centre had been raped or sexually assaulted while at Yarl’s Wood. What, I wonder, could be the reason behind such defensiveness? Well, the Home Office views is that a “disclosure would, or would be likely to, prejudice the commercial interests” of a corporation such as Serco. Better to avoid drops in share prices than discover if detained women have suffered sexual violence.
With the Nauru files, we are in danger of detaching ourselves from the horrors they document. Holding Australia out as some extraordinary example of heartlessness is an easy way to ignore abuses closer to home. We’re in no position to pontificate. Ours is not a higher claim to human decency.
As we come close to the first anniversary of Alan Kurdi’s death, I am reminded of the outpouring of emotion and goodwill released by the image of his little body on that beach. It seemed then we understood the terrible cost of standing by and watching daily as tragedies unfold. A year on, what is painfully obvious is that not much has changed, despite our collective call to action.

