
As I ventured by private taxi toward the University of Ghana, where I was living and teaching, I noticed the driver staring at me in his rear-view mirror.




Tell us about a time you faced your fear




I was used to being observed as a bit of an oddity there: I likely appear Ghanaian, or at least of African descent, but then my accent and manner reveal me to be an American. It’s thrown people for a moment during my repeat visits.
But beyond those occasions, the curiosity can signal imminent trouble. From childhood, I had been cautioned by numerous elders that unwanted attention from certain men could escalate to violence. I always tried to head off such situations at the pass; the nagging fear of being assaulted was terrifying. I looked up at the rear-view mirror again to make sure the driver was not watching me anymore, and my eyes met his unfriendly gaze. 
“Is he going to rob me?” I thought, as we crept toward the university. I began looking around to figure out a way to escape the vehicle in sight of witnesses if need be, but the pedestrian and street traffic was minimal. It occurred to me that it was 10pm on the second day of the extended national election; perhaps people were still standing in queues or awaiting the results at home. 
We continued for a few minutes more, when the driver suddenly parked the car in front of a hotel in an area that was eerily dark, because the structure was being renovated. He switched off the engine and turned out the headlights.
“Get in the front seat,” he demanded.
I heard him, but I responded as if I needed to clarify my destination for him: “No. Not here. Please take me to the university.”




Facing my fear: driving while black can be fatal. But I've got places to go | Taylor Crumpton




“Get in the front seat,” he repeated and then he added, “I like it that way.”
In that moment, I recalled a long-ago episode of The Oprah Winfrey Show in which a guest had advised the audience members that if they are ever kidnapped, attacked or feared for their life in some way, never allow the perpetrator to take them to a second location. I bolted from the taxi, sprinting as fast as my sandals would take me back in the direction in which we had traveled. I screamed for help until the inside of my throat felt as if it were ripping away, fleck by tiny fleck.
My voice began to strain and fade as the driver, who ran more quickly than I, caught up with me. As I stood frozen, he started slapping me in the face and across my upper body. He demanded that I shut up. In the midst of this chaos, I was aware that no cars were passing by, and I felt powerless to act.
And then they arrived. Not cars, but several men on foot. I remember those brave young brothers: several of them came running across the normally busy Liberation Road to my rescue, pausing in the median briefly to assess the situation and then encircling the enraged driver, whom they interrogated in a local language that I didn’t speak.
Minutes later, the men turned to me and told me to pay the taxi driver the money he was due. Bewildered and outnumbered, I complied. It turns out that the driver had concocted a story that I had been in his taxi with other people who all had run away from the car to avoid paying the fare. The young men were angry that they had been duped, but the taxi driver had already disappeared into the night.
I am embarrassed about the shame that I felt in the aftermath of the assault. My stomach dropped every time other women, most of whom were enormously sympathetic and great sources of support, inquired about the hour when the attack occurred. Did it somehow look bad for a woman, and a professor at that, to be out at a party so late and to be traveling alone? Or, I later asked, being gentler with myself and less paranoid about their intentions: were these women taking notes to protect themselves and their female loved ones?




 

I screamed for help until the inside of my throat felt as if it were ripping away, fleck by tiny fleck




 

This incident also impressed upon me the precariousness of my safety as a woman, the archaic expectations under which we are expected to make a life, and the ultimate failure of our societies – which often focus more on policing women’s bodies than policing those who harm us – to take our grievances seriously (I reported the assault to the authorities but, from the moment I entered the station, they treated me dismissively).
And I continue to wonder how often other assaults – particularly those that are far more brutal than the one I endured, and where there isn’t help nearby – go under- or unreported worldwide. Be it because victims fear they will be ostracized from their communities, or because they know that justice will not be served, too many women still move through the world inadequately protected.
Today I am more vigilant than I was four years ago, but that is not to say that I have elected to live my life fearfully. I reject all attempts to force women into patterns of silence, and encourage the telling and retelling of our experiences until our lives are truly valued and our humanity is recognized.

