
The Scots like their sporting heroes to be edgy and unpredictable. We appreciate their brilliance and their hard work and that they have given up a large portion of their lives in pursuit of excellence. But it helps, too, if there are little flaws and kinks in their characters or in their conduct because, in those moments when their demons are in the ascendancy, they seem that much closer to us.
Benny Lynch, perhaps the greatest boxer that Scotland has ever produced, set the template for the Scottish tormented genius. The little Gorbals-born fighter died tragically early at the age of 33, a year after the end of the Second World War, but not before he had conquered the world.
Many years later, Ring magazine rated him the world’s fifth greatest flyweight. He was always running up a down escalator, though. Gorbals, a sprawling, working-class enclave just south of the river Clyde, was then one of the most deprived neighbourhoods in the UK and one where premature death from alcohol-related disease was a commonplace.
At those times when Benny reached for his genius and found that it was becoming harder to get, he reached instead for alcohol, his torment increased by the loneliness and disorientation of fulfilling a nation’s expectations. Seventy years after his death, he is still celebrated and not only for his exploits in the ring.
Ken Buchanan, Jocky Wilson, Jimmy Johnstone and Jim Baxter too all knew something of the challenges that faced Benny Lynch when they stepped away from the safety and security of the sporting arena. In those places, they considered their opponents not merely to be their foes but to be their fellow gladiators. They knew they were all there to slake the blood-lust of the public and that the public would never be satisfied.
It is why, in Scotland, there has been a wellspring of grief and sadness at the torments being faced by poor Paul Gascoigne. This tortured soul once brought joy to millions of his fellow countrymen and was blessed with a generous and carefree spirit. Now he is fodder for red-top newspapers that mock his afflictions while pretending to care.
We care about him.
This is not to say that we don’t also celebrate those who, whether by upbringing or genes, could meet glory and despair on their own terms and remain unaffected by either. Eric Liddell was like that and so is Sir Chris Hoy. Yet even in Liddell’s blameless and virtuous life he was a rebel. His rebellions were against a world that placed materialism and worldly riches above God and he chose to be different by opting for his Lord and Saviour above all else.
He may have been a blessed man but he was also a blessedly thrawn one.
The Scots celebrate all these heroes too because, well… we don’t produce very many of them. Sometimes, generations will elapse during which we are sullenly accepting of what seems to be our natural place in the order of sporting nobility. During these periods, we are content to hold the jackets and take pictures when the medals are being handed out.
We console ourselves that our men and women gave of their best and that they did so with good grace and another rueful smile. And anyway, who wants to be remembered for producing nothing but athletes when your soldiers, engineers and inventors can also make footprints in the clay?
For a while, we thought that Andy Murray might be forever cast in the traditional Scots sporting role of pace-maker, gently moving aside after a few minutes in the sun to let the big beasts go galloping past. Yet in this, the most competitive and unforgiving era in the history of international tennis, he has swept to the final of nine grand slams, winning three of them. In each of the 10 years or so comprising his professional career he has had to contend with Roger Federer, Rafael Nadal and Novak Djokovic, three of the finest players ever to have stepped on to a court.
It’s in watching Murray play some of those five-set matches that we see him in all his majesty. There he is at the end of the court, standing lean and tall and as alert as a lurcher. And there he is bounding into the point and leaving no sinew in his body unstretched as he chases down serves that would have breached the defences of all others.
In no game I have ever seen him play has he given anything less than all of himself. Simply seeing him in action is a mentally exhausting experience. Watching him trying to see out a match from a winning position is like what it must have been like waiting for the astronauts from Apollo 13 to emerge from the sea. And yet I will never tire of watching him.
On Friday, Murray carried the flag for Team GB at the opening ceremony of the Rio Olympics. There were some who felt that the honour ought to have gone to a lesser-known athlete or at least to one who better represented the Olympian amateur ideal. But that one sailed a long ago and, by all accounts, he was a very popular choice among Britain’s 300-strong team.
Neither did the choice of Murray as flag-bearer meet with the approval of those who resented his decision to vote for Scottish independence in 2014. Yet, like many others who joined him in this, he retains a great love for the United Kingdom. No other player played more or ran more or sacrificed more in bringing the Davis Cup back to Britain. As in 2012 Murray will be a visible presence in the athletes’ village rather than remaining aloof from it in the manner of some of the other global superstars.
In some households he is regarded as dour and chippy, but he’s not really. This is a young man whose childhood classmates were murdered during the Dunblane massacre. He honours them and Dunblane whenever he plays and he honours them whenever he speaks. No other Scot has ever made me more proud to be Scottish.

