
“I understand you’re frightened, but you need to just go do this,” my dad said after I fled the oral surgeon who was scheduled to pull out my wisdom teeth. I had read a Yelp review by a woman whose entire face went numb from his handiwork.




Tell us about a time you faced your fear




I knew from everything else on Yelp what anything it said was worth. Still, I couldn’t enter that operating room. I’d had a phobia of dentists since witnessing my surgery reflected in a dentist’s glasses when I was eight. I was now 22, though. There was something irrational about this.
But I was barely able to tell what was irrational and what wasn’t at that point. About eight months earlier, shortly after graduating from college, I got a phone call from a student loan company about what I owed. I was confused: I had had a year of college free on scholarship, and my parents told me they would pay back the rest of the loans I took out to pay my in-state tuition.
I called my mom, who explained I would have to pay the loans in my name after all thanks to the recession and her own expensive oral surgery. She told me I should get a job in an office to pay the loans, confused as to why I still worked for minimum wage at a movie theater.
Trying to digest the news, I stared in the bathroom mirror, swigging Evan Williams from a mug that said “Sexy Grandpa”. I picked at scabs and looked in my mouth, a lifelong nervous habit. I suppose I’d been too busy with school before then to notice the top of one of my wisdom teeth had turned to black mush. I had no insurance and about $300 to my name. 
I got an additional job writing ad copy for Amazon. Though I identify and present mostly as male – the only items marketed to women that I buy are tampons – the company put me on the women’s jewelry beat, writing 50 paragraphs a day about where one might wear a pewter charm shaped like a hat or a woman bathing a baby.
My roommate would wake up at 3am to pee and find me standing in the living room peeling my skin off or researching dentistry. He cooked for a living and frequently brought me enticing work leftovers, but I was in such complete panic at all hours that the only things I could keep down were cereal and whiskey.
“It’s just adulthood crashing in,” my friend Web assured me one evening, handing me a double shot of something far nicer than I could afford. I desperately hoped that was a natural sort of violence, like how caterpillars completely liquefy to become butterflies. 
After all, I couldn’t understand my inability to focus on anything but terror, and my seeming inability to do anything about it. Why was I working a minimum wage job? Why was I so upset by having to pay my loans when most people are in that same boat? Why wasn’t I a grownup like my parents yet, who were utterly exasperated and worried about me? Why was my tooth rotting out of my head?
In therapy years later, I was told that what kept me from sleeping, and made me stare at nothing until someone told me to finish cleaning the popcorn machine, wasn’t solely fear of adulthood. I was actually having a manic episode. 
I don’t know what causes them, though I can now recall and identify several. But at the time I didn’t know that, and tried to make the feeling stop by working through the list of things I thought were the source of my fears: my impending dental bills, my loans and my future. 




Facing my fear: being in public as a woman for the very first time | Chelsea E Manning




My dental dread was assuaged after I found a surgeon with great reviews who, after I finagled my way on to my dad’s insurance, cost about $300. Also, I met a girl, which kept my mind good and occupied. (Fortunately we lasted a few weeks past the surgery.) 
I took some insurance-funded Valium on wisdom tooth eve, and the last thing I remember before falling asleep on my mom’s couch was the girl texting me that she wished she was holding me. I was still high on Valium when I got to the dentist and have a blurry recollection of asking the hygienist not to put my head inside Gary Coleman’s head while I was out. 
“I could kill you,” my mom said when I came to. “All that worry and the surgery took 15 minutes.” She made me macaroni and I watched a movie. “Do you feel better?”
I didn’t at that moment. But over time, though I still didn’t know I was in the throes of a manic episode, I finally felt it lift, like a fever, as I sat on the roof of my apartment building writing a poem, one wisdom tooth pinned to my coat for luck. 

