The only thing worth knowing about the movie business, a great Hollywood scriptwriter famously observed, is that no one knows nothing. If he is still taking commissions at 85, William Goldman would be the obvious choice to write Brexit: The Movie. Approaching three months after the referendum, the PM is uneasily pictured on the outskirts of that G20 group photo in China… and still NO ONE. KNOWS. NUFFINK.

Does Brexit mean leaving the single market entirely, mostly, a fair bit, or not really at all? Who can say? Does it mean ending, partially restricting or barely tinkering with freedom of movement? Not a clue. How long will it take to negotiate trade deals with the EU, the US and other nations, and how punishing might the terms be? Go figure. Will British expats retain the right of residency in EU countries? Beats me.

There are scores of other intriguing questions raised by the June vote, and to all of them the official reply may be paraphrased as follows: you might as well ask Larry, the Downing Street cat.



For every human ostrich to whom this ignorance is bliss, countless souls will find the uncertainty unnerving. Even the zealous Leaver who felt imprisoned by Brussels may be feeling a little like the paroled lifer whose initial rush of exhilaration is cauterised by the first unfamiliar blast of sunlight. Brooks in The Shawshank Redemption, for instance, who cannot handle life on the outside, and hangs himself.

Yet as we stumble about getting nowhere in the darkness, give thanks for one shining beacon to illuminate the path. What, David Davis was repeatedly asked in the Commons this week, does Brexit mean? Brexit, replied the Brexit Secretary, sampling the PM but speaking with the unique insight his portfolio confers, means Brexit.

David Davis heckled

If gnomic impenetrability is what you want from any means-related slogan, Brexit-means-Brexit must be the best ever. Beanz Meanz Heinz was pretty good in its day, at least when you first heard it in a TV advert. What the naked ear took for “beans” could have referred, after all, to string, runner, kidney, borlotti or any other member of the bean family. Only when you saw it written as “beanz” did that “z” remove any doubt that it was a Heinz haricot bean in tomato sauce, and all the fun went out of it.

Another contender from yesteryear was “Love means never having to say you’re sorry”, the tagline from the film of Erich Segal’s weepy novel Love Story. That sounded unfathomably deep and meaningless on first acquaintance. Then it struck you that love means having to say sorry all the time, frequently for offences you haven’t committed – and in catchphrase terms, being diametrically wrong and arrant cobblers ain’t a patch on meaning nothing.

The biggest loser of the “means” genre, I think, is a staple of the short-tempered parent. Admittedly, “no means no” seldom works. Overheard in the supermarket sweetie aisle, it tends to be the prologue to, “Oh, all right, then, have the f****** Haribos, see if I care if you get dentures for your 10th birthday.” Yet its fatal flaw is its clarity. “No” in this context can only mean “no”. It can’t possibly mean “Yes”, “Maybe”, “Noel Edmonds’ scrotal sack”, or, “Watch yerself, missus, or I’ll move that Nissan plant from Sunderland to the outskirts of Zagreb.”

To his credit, David Davis understands that a catchphrase’s paramount aim is to bamboozle. Bruce Forsyth never grasped this, which is why he’d be such a hopeless Brexit Secretary. When he asked, “What do points make?”, the only possible answer was “Prizes!” Ditto with “Nice to see you…” In a political climate which treasures opacity, Brucie would be way out of his depth.

If “Brexit means Brexit” is genius – and it is – this has less than nothing to do with the factual accuracy which is such a wickedly devalued currency in the context. “John is John,” Tony Blair said of Prescott after he biffed the eggman, and that also was true. “Black is black,” sang Las Bravas in 1966, before adding that they wanted their baby back. Again, no argument there.

No, the cosmic brilliance of “Brexit means Brexit” is that, unless or until defined by reference to more than itself , Brexit potentially means anything, and therefore means absolutely nothing.

Which celebrities support Brexit and which support Remain?







30 show all Which celebrities support Brexit and which support Remain?

























































1/30 David Beckham (REMAIN) The former captain for the England international football team announced on Instagram that he was “voting to Remain”. He said: “We live in a vibrant and connected world where together as a people we are strong. For our children and their children we should be facing the problems of the world together and not alone.” Getty Images

2/30 Victoria Beckham (REMAIN) 'I believe in my country, I believe in a future for my children where we are stronger together and I support the remain campaign.' Getty

3/30 Daniel Craig (REMAIN) Actor He was pictured wearing a white T-shirt with the slogan: 'No man is an island. No country by itself. Vote Remain on 23rd June.' Getty Images

4/30 Bob Geldof (REMAIN) Irish singer expresses his support for the Remain vote as he waves from a boat carrying supporters for the 'Remain' campaign in London AFP/Getty

5/30 John Cleese (LEAVE) The Monty Python star signalled he will vote to leave the EU when he tweeted: "If I thought there was any chance of major reform in the EU, I'd vote to stay in. But there isn't. Sad." Getty Images for the 2015 Tribec

6/30 Daniel Portman (REMAIN) Game of Thrones actor supports Reamin vote Getty Images

7/30 Elton John (REMAIN) The singer also announced his intention to vote Remain on Instagram, sharing an image which said “Build bridges not walls,” along with the caption “I'm voting to remain. #StrongerInEurope” AFP/Getty Images

8/30 Roger Daltrey (LEAVE) Former frontman of iconic rock band The Who.” I am not anti European, but I an anti the present way we are being governed in Europe,” he wrote in The Mirror. “The whole system has been corrupted by political ego and massive government overreach. The Euro being a perfect example… I do not want to be dragged into the kind of Federal State that this present EU is pushing for - with the UK's voice getting smaller and smaller. AFP/Getty Images

9/30 JK Rowling (REMAIN) The author of the Harry Potter books has expressed concern that "racists and bigots" are directing parts of the Leave campaign. She added: “How can a retreat into selfish and insecure individualism be the right response when Europe faces genuine threats, when the bonds that tie us are so powerful, when we have come so far together? How can we hope to conquer the enormous challenges of terrorism and climate change without cooperation and collaboration?” Getty Images

10/30 Vivienne Westwood (REMAIN) British fashion designer expressed her support for Remain vote Getty Images

11/30 Michael Caine (LEAVE) The actor has said he is a reluctant Leaver. He said: "I don't know what to vote for. Both are scary. To me, you've now got in Europe a sort of government-by-proxy of everybody, who has now got carried away. Unless there is some extremely significant changes, we should get out." Getty Images

12/30 Benedict Cumberbatch (REMAIN) Benedict Cumberbatch and Sir Patrick Stewart led more than 280 figures from the arts world who backed a vote to stay. An open letter pledging support for Remain was also signed by music stars Hot Chip, alt-J and Paloma Faith, authors Dame Hilary Mantel and John le Carre, and fashion designer Dame Vivienne Westwood. Daniel Craig was pictured wearing a vote Remain t-shirt with the words "No man is an island. No country by itself" emblazoned across it in a picture tweeted on the Stronger IN account. Getty Images

13/30 Patrick Stewart (REMAIN) Actor is a leading supporter of the Remain campaign Getty Images

14/30 Elizabeth Hurley (LEAVE) The actress said “If it means we can go back to using decent lightbulbs and choose high-powered hairdryers and vacuum cleaners if we so wish, I'm joining Brexit for sure.” Getty Images

15/30 Stephen Hawking (REMAIN) The physicist is in favour staying, and said "progress comes from co-operation". He said: "By working together in Europe we make our economy stronger and we give ourselves more influence in the world and we provide future opportunities for young people." Numerous scientists have also voiced their support for Remain, claiming an out vote would badly damage the field. Getty Images for Breakthrough Pr

16/30 Sol Campbell (LEAVE) – The former England international football star said he is backing Brexit so that young British sporting talent would be nurtured and given greater opportunities at British clubs. He said: "I'm looking at the sporting side - how youngsters aren't getting the opportunities at some of the big clubs and some of the big clubs are bringing in youngsters from 14, 15, 16 and becoming homegrown, which is pushing some of our youngsters out." Getty Images

17/30 Hilary Mantel (REMAIN) Author Hilary Mantel announced her support for Remain vote Getty Images

18/30 Bear Grylls (REMAIN) The adventurer and TV presenter said he spoke "from the heart" in backing the EU. "At such a time for the UK to retreat, run and cut ourselves loose from Europe, when there are so many challenges on our doorstep, to me just doesn't feel either courageous or kind,” he said. “Europe has many flaws, but I also believe the way to help resolve many of those tough issues is from within... I have never been a good quitter and I am so proud of the UK and our values: tolerance, kindness, respect, courage and resilience. This is why I want us to stay together and Remain in Europe." Getty Images

19/30 Billy Bragg (REMAIN) British singer decided to support Remain campaign AFP/Getty Images

20/30 Ian Botham (LEAVE) The former England Test cricketer and Test team captain supports Brexit Getty Images for Laureus

21/30 Simon Cowell (REMAIN) Music mogul Simon Cowell announced his support of staying in EU Getty Images

22/30 David James (LEAVE) The former England goalkeeper supports Brexit Getty Images

23/30 Idris Elba (REMAIN) The actor voiced his support for Remain vote Getty Images

24/30 John Le Carre (REMAIN) British writer supports Remain campaign Getty Images

25/30 Paloma Faith (REMAIN) English singer supports Remain campaign Getty Images

26/30 Perry McCarthy (LEAVE) The racing driver supports Leave campaign Rex Features

27/30 Keira Knightley (REMAIN) The actress intends to vote for Remain campaign Getty Images for Lincoln Center

28/30 James Cracknell (LEAVE) British athlete and rowing champion decided to vote for Brexit Getty Images

29/30 Florence Welch (REMAIN) British singer supports Remain campaign Getty Images for Gucci

30/30 Helena Bonham-Carter (REMAIN) The actress expressed her support for Remain vote AFP/Getty Images

With government and country trapped in this curious stasis while we wait for Brexit to take corporeal shape, several indicators suggest the economy is performing far better than doomsayers predicted. This is great news, and long may it continue, though the Prime Minister is less optimistic than those pro-Brexit newspapers which are prone to premature self-vindication.

Theresa May warns of serious trouble ahead. With Obama and the Japanese issuing doomy warnings, Lloyds of London threatening to jettison its “of London” by relocating, and other alarming portents, we can probably trust the PM on that.

So it is that, even as bullish Brexiteers greet the short-term growth in consumer spending and the construction sector as definitive proof that the promised land is in view, I can’t help recalling the end of William Goldman’s greatest movie. “For a moment there, I thought we were in trouble,” a relieved Butch Cassidy tells the Sundance Kid after the outlaws apparently cheat death by hiding in a disused fort. In the next shot, they stroll out into both the sunlight and the gunfire of the entire Bolivian army.

* This article has been amended. It originally referred to Wiliam Goldman as having died. We are pleased to confirm he is still very much alive. 13/9/16