
Ever felt like your love of coffee runs so deep you must be genetically predisposed to enjoy it? That might not be as ridiculous as it sounds: a new study suggests there may actually be a coffee gene.
The impact coffee has on your body can be both good and bad. On the positive side, it contains a range of antioxidants and plant chemicals, and it’s been suggested moderate coffee consumption might lower the risk of Alzheimer’s disease. 
 However, caffeine also causes the release of adrenaline, activating your “fight or flight mode”. This can lead to restlessness, anxiety and a quickened heartbeat. As it’s a stimulant, those who love caffeine also risk a bad night’s sleep. Last year, the European Food Safety Authority warned that drinking more than five espressos a day could put your health at risk.
We spoke to readers about their relationship with coffee – their joy on first tasting it, and their struggles to give it up.
Janik Hansen, 26, Copenhagen: ‘I drink about 12 to 18 cups a day, and desperately want to cut down’








  

I run a company, based about an hour from Copenhagen in Denmark, with my dad. To get me through the day I have about one coffee every hour – so about 12 to 18 a day. You might think this would inhibit my sleep, and I usually only get five to seven hours, but I never slept for very long even before I started to drink coffee.
I don’t have coffee for the first hour of the day as I’m focused ongetting my son ready, but as soon as I start working it’s the firstthing I need. I love Blue Mountain coffee from Jamaica, but usually I just have either Nescafe or Starbucks.
At the beginning of August I tried to cut back, but started drinking more again about a week ago because I found not having it too hard. I had huge withdrawal symptoms, and hardly any energy. To keep my energy levels up I had to go to the gym loads and make sure I ate a lot.
I would like to cut down on my coffee intake as it affects my energy levels (leaving me lethargic without it). I’m thinking of new ways to change my caffeine habits, and would welcome suggestions.
Claire Ferguson, 53, London : ‘After being a Mormon for years, I fell in love with coffee’





Photograph: Claire


I tasted my first coffee 12 years ago, at the age of 41, and it was a heavenly experience. My best friend had taken me to a well-known coffee shop and I thought I heard angels sing while I was drinking it. 
I’d spent my life before then avoiding the evils of coffee (and tea and cigarettes and alcohol … to name but a few restrictions) because of my belief in the Mormon church. 
In the years since that first cappuccino, and leaving the Mormon church, I have delighted in this new-found wonder. After 41 years of almost no caffeine (I’d indulged in the occasional Diet Coke or Pepsi) the effects of coffee still feel fabulous.
I have one coffee a day – a soya latte in the morning that jolts me awake. It is often the first thing I think of when I wake up and the thought of it makes me smile.
One of the things I love about coffee is that it makes me feel better emotionally. If I’m irritable or low, coffee changes that; it makes the world seem brighter. I can definitely say coffee is one of the loves of my life.
Tom Walters, 32, Chichester: ‘The small things, such as the first sip of coffee, are what makes life beautiful’








  

I wouldn’t consider myself a massive coffee drinker, but I need a strong one to wake me up – otherwise I can’t shift that morning fog. However, I usually start off with a cup of tea, before moving on to two Nespresso pods (the stronger and more bitter the better) mixed with hot milk, all poured into a flask for my morning commute to Brighton.
I may have another cup if I’m feeling like a zombie (a byproduct of having a nine-month-old baby boy) but all caffeine-related activity must stop before 1pm. When I drink tea or coffee in the afternoon it seems to make me sluggish.
I drink coffee for two reasons. Firstly, I adore the smell and taste of it. For some reason, it brings back nostalgic memories of travelling the world with my then fiance: I never started a day without a strong cup of local coffee. The other reason is its energy-providing properties (as I already mentioned). I’ve had periods before when I’ve stopped drinking it, but it’s the small things – the first sip of coffee, or the smell of toast – that make life. The beautiful minutiae of existence.
Jasmin Bauer, 29, Hamburg: ‘I hate coffee and have only met a handful of people who understand my plight’








  

I hate coffee. I don’t even like anything with coffee flavouring. I do like the smell of roasted beans, but that’s about it. And yes, I have tried all sorts of coffee: ones with lots of sugar or no sugar, milky ones and ones that are freshly-ground and so on. 
People always feel the need to convince me about how great coffee is and everyone looks startled when I say I don’t drink it, asking how I can work and stay awake. I am the type of person who just gets up when the alarm rings. If I do feel the need for caffeine I drink Coke Zero and in extreme cases, such as when I go out at night, Red Bull.
I have only met a handful of people who understand my plight. I don’t even know how to make coffee, which has created some awkward situations in the past. For example, if I am expected to offer coffee to a client I panic and frantically try to find someone who can help. Then, when I am asked to make coffee again, I have already forgotten how to do it.
Paula Rose Toohey, 31, Tasmania: ‘Coffee is the smell of my travels from Adelaide to Hobart with my brother’








  

Coffee is the smell of childhood at my grandma’s house, the scent of filter coffee permeating the house as she told me stories of being a migrant from Europe after the war – she always said she found not having real coffee harder than learning English. Coffee is working in a rainforest as part of John Howard’s Green Corps programme, building walking tracks and eating chocolate-coated coffee beans. Coffee is my dad and mum watching the ABC news after dinner.
It is travelling from Adelaide to Hobart with my brother in his car, camping as we were broke, and spending what money we had on a half-decent brew at the start of our trip. Coffee is me curled up in bed on a Sunday morning with my kitties reading the newspapers. And now it is me going to work and making people’s days a bit better with my job as a barista. There is a saying: first coffee you are a customer, second cup you are a friend and third cup you are family.

