
It’s a lovely thought. Up in the heights of the very chapel where the all-male cardinals of the Catholic church meet in conclave to elect popes, there is a 500-year-old feminist code that mocks the misogyny of the Christian religion. A code so well-hidden and so subversive that only now can its shattering satire on Catholic patriarchy be revealed.
So claims Dr Deivis de Campos, researcher in human anatomy at the Federal University of Health Sciences of Porto Alegre in Brazil, who is the lead author of an article in the journal Clinical Anatomy which purports to identify hidden anatomical allusions in Michelangelo’s stupendous fresco on the ceiling of the Sistine chapel.
Using their 21st-century medical knowledge, De Campos and his collaborators can discern uncannily accurate renderings of the human uterus, ovaries and Fallopian tubes hidden in the shapes of curly-horned ram’s skulls that Michelangelo included among the dizzying illusory architecture, colossal male nudes, and scenes from the Bible that he painted right along the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel. These allusions to the female reproductive system are a concealed attack on Catholic misogyny, suggest the scientists, by an artist who thought Christianity could learn a lot from the more matriarchal traditions of Judaism and the pagan world.








  

Visitors photographing a reproduction of the The Creation of Adam fresco at the Votive Church in Vienna. Photograph: Christian Bruna/EPA


Sadly this delicious fantasy of Michelangelo filling the pope’s chapel with feminist logos is based on what appears to be total ignorance about the artist and his time. It imposes a modern world view on a man who died in 1564.
Before we examine exactly how far Michelangelo was from being a feminist, let’s look at the obvious medical howler that completely disproves this nonsensical misinterpretation of the Sistine chapel.
Michelangelo’s ram heads, it is claimed, are in reality portrayals of Fallopian tubes – the clue is in the name. These delicate tubes connecting the ovaries and uterus were discovered by the Italian Renaissance scientist Gabriello Faloppio in the mid-16th century and his research was published in the 1560s. It was a remarkable leap forward in medical knowledge, yet it came a few decades too late to be included in the Sistine ceiling, which Michelangelo finished in 1512.
As the Brazilian researchers probably know, Michelangelo himself did anatomical dissections to learn more about the human body so he could sculpt and paint it better. Presumably, then, he must have dissected women and made – in secret – anatomical observations years ahead of his time. Whereas Michelangelo left no drawings of his dissection, his contemporary Leonardo da Vinci did.
Looking at Leonardo’s beautiful anatomical drawings – which really are way ahead of their time – it becomes even clearer how absurd it is to attribute a modern medical understanding of women’s bodies to male Renaissance artists: for instance in his moving portrayal of a foetus in the womb, Leonardo mistakenly includes knobbly tooth-like linkages in the walls of the uterus that he had observed in a dissection of a cow. This confusion of cows and humans is just one of his misunderstandings of women’s bodies – and he was a scientific genius.
Even if it were somehow possible for Michelangelo to have a 21st-century image of the female reproductive system in his head when he started the Sistine ceiling in 1508, there is one very obvious reason to doubt he would have used it.




 

The discovery of the Fallopian tubes was in the mid-1500s, decades too late for the Sistine ceiling




 

Michelangelo had no interest in women or their bodies. He is the very least likely candidate to be a feminist artist. I can see feminism in the strong women Titian portrayed – he liked, in fact adored, women – but Michelangelo? It is a cliche but undeniably true that when Michelangelo portrays nude women he very obviously portrays a male body, then clumsily sticks on a couple of marble breasts. This is visibly true of his famous allegorical sculpure, Night. It’s hard to believe that a man who thought womens’ breasts had a huge, muscular gap between them had ever closely examined any part of the female body.
When Michelangelo was adapting his figure of Night into a painting of Leda and the Swan, he expressed his true carnal feelings in a portrait that gives Leda the face of his male pupil Antonio Mini. Michelangelo was so uninterested in women that he even tried to make Joseph more important than Mary in his painting of the Holy family, which hangs in the Uffizi gallery, Florence.
This leads us to another massive misunderstanding at the centre of this daft “Sistine code” theory. Is the Catholic church misogynist? By modern standards perhaps, but in the middle ages and the Renaissance, the Virgin Mary was so central to Christian art and worship that it was more like a matriarchal religion: from all the cathedrals dedicated to Notre Dame – Our Lady – to adoring paintings of her by the likes of Botticelli and Piero della Francesca, it was the female intercessor, the loving mother of God, who people revered.
With one exception. Michelangelo is the only Renaissance artist who tries to overturn the cult of Mary. His painting The Holy Family portrays Joseph as the head of the household. And on the Sistine ceiling he portrays a world of masculine nobility betrayed by the serpent that is woman.








  

‘The scientists have got it completely backwards: Christian art in Michelangelo’s time was full of strong, beautiful, holy women.’ Photograph: AP


On the Sistine ceiling a bearded patriarchal God creates the world then gives life to a heroically nude Adam. Michelangelo places huge stress on the maleness of Adam. Not only that, but he adds a whole gallery of male nudes disporting themselves up in the chapel’s heights.
Then comes the Fall. The serpent that offers Eve the apple that will curse humanity has a woman’s face and torso and flowing hair: Michelangelo depicts the Fall as a conspiracy of women.
This was not Catholic dogma. The scientists have got it completely backwards: Christian art in Michelangelo’s time was full of strong, beautiful, holy women. Nor did anyone force Michelangelo to paint this misogynist image of the Fall. He had huge artistic freedom. We cannot just transpose our own ideals and values on to the past.
Like other fantasy versions of art’s hidden “codes”, this silly theory is a distraction from the genuine subversive message painted in the Sistine chapel.
Michelangelo was no feminist but his love for the male body – the perfect divine body in his eyes – was courageous and unequivocal. He wrote love poems to men and made no secret of his passion for the male form. Gossips called him a “sodomite”. He replied that his love of men was Platonic.
When he painted the Last Judgment on the altar wall of the Sistine chapel he filled the heavens with male nudes. He was accused of making the chapel look like a “bathhouse” or a gay brothel. As soon as he died, a hack painter was hired to paint draperies over the prominent buttocks in the Sistine.
Many of these draperies are still there. Michelangelo’s sexuality still troubles the Vatican. The danger of fictionalising history is that we miss real dramas of dissent and difference. Michelangelo is not a feminist hero, but he is a gay one.

