In a world where good news is often a rarity, the peace accord struck last week between Colombia’s government and the leaders of the country’s main Marxist rebel group, the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (Farc), stands out. The deal, four years in the making, brings to an end an era of often violent confrontation whose origins may be traced back to the peasant revolts of the 1960s. The Farc insurgency was rooted in a quest for social justice and land reform, issues that had dogged the country – sparking multiple uprisings between peasants and a landed elite – since its independence from Spain in 1819.

Stark though these inequalities were, successive governments in Bogotá entirely failed to address the primary causes, and in response to the Farc insurgency they resorted instead to ruthless extirpation and repression; the insurgency, in turn, morphed into a terror campaign of killings, kidnappings and bombings.

Farc’s leadership became closely involved with the lucrative trade in cocaine, helping to supply the apparently insatiable North American market, to fund their insurrection. It sometimes became difficult to distinguish between the original guerrilla movement and opportunistic criminal gangs and drug lords who exploited chronic unrest to further their selfish, greedy aims.

The insurgency and the brutal official response distorted and undermined Colombia’s shaky democracy, exacerbating divisions linked to class, race and land. It brought to power hardline rightwing governments prepared to countenance extra-judicial methods, including covert, paramilitary death squads, in pursuit of vain and costly attempts to “win” the war”.

There were no winners during this war. In the early 1990s, assailed by Farc on the one hand and Pablo Escobar-style narco-terrorism – whose money corrupted the judiciary, the police and the body politic – on the other, the country was close to being a failed state as the institutions buckled and very nearly broke.

The insurgency, more than 50 years old, is estimated to have taken up to 260,000 lives and displaced about 8 million people. As Juan Manuel Santos, Colombia’s president, said last week, few citizens escaped the dire effects, direct and indirect, of the resulting endemic instability. Nor were the ill effects confined to Colombia. Its weakness invited foreign meddling, whether by the regime of former Venezuelan leader Hugo Chávez, which gave refuge to Farc leaders, or by US presidents, such as George Bush Snr, who co-opted Colombia in Washington’s ill-conceived “war on drugs”. The involvement of the American military, special forces and CIA units in government counter-insurgency and counter-narcotics campaigns magnified the drama but failed to solve the problem.

When set against this grim background, the peace deal reached in Havana must surely be viewed as a welcome development. It is a tribute to Santos, who has dedicated his presidency to its achievement. And it reflects well on Timoleón Jiménez, alias Timochenko, the Farc leader, who has finally traded violent resistance for a more peaceful future. The agreement is also a feather in the Che Guevara berets of Cuba’s leaders, who provided a neutral talks venue for UN mediators and for European countries, notably Norway, which supported the process.

Britain’s role was not insignificant. The draft final agreement draws on shared experience gained in formulating the Good Friday accords in Northern Ireland, as Downing Street was quick to point out. Irish Republicans also did their bit, atoning, perhaps, for past, less-than-constructive IRA links to the rebels. So congratulations are certainly in order. The breakthrough is a universal positive, demonstrating that even the most protracted conflicts can be resolved peacefully. It strengthens hopes, for example, that the current Geneva negotiations will eventually deliver a lasting Syrian truce. But for Colombia, the key question now is whether this historic deal can be made to stick.

The pact is much more than a mere ceasefire and downing of arms, as last week’s joint communiqué made clear. “The end of the conflict will mean the opening of a new chapter of our history. It means beginning a transition phase that may contribute to a greater integration of our territories, a greater social inclusion — especially of those who have lived at the margins of our development and have suffered the conflict — and strengthening our democracy... with full security guarantees for those who participate in politics,” its provisions stated.

In other words, this ambitious agreement calls for a range of sweeping structural changes including, crucially, land ownership reforms, daunting in their scope and highly challenging in their implementation. By offering the rebels immediate, non-voting representation in Congress, to be followed by legitimate, party-based participation in subsequent national elections, it also envisages a degree of political inclusiveness that could revolutionise Colombia’s democracy in ways Farc’s ideologists once only dreamed about. This is a tall order for any country – particularly one as divided across sectarian right and left lines as Colombia.

The debate preceding the national referendum on the deal, promised by Santos for 2 October, will expose these faultlines. Chief among them is the offer to most of Farc’s 7,000 fighters of an amnesty and de facto immunity from prosecution as part of a new transitional justice system. This offer is deeply resented by many surviving victims and their families who want retribution, not reconciliation. So, too, is the plan to pay demobilised rebels 90% of the national minimum wage as an upfront incentive to bring them in from the jungle. Álvaro Uribe, the former conservative president and leader of the main Centre Democratic party opposition, has vowed to resist these terms. He is urging a “no” vote in October.

The rebels, meanwhile, fear for their safety once they disarm. And with good reason. Their last experiment in politics was the Unión Patriótica, a party they co-founded in 1985 with a view to entering the political peace process. Unión Patriótica quickly made electoral gains across the country before a vicious three-year campaign of violence by rightwing paramilitaries murdered 3,000 of their activists, union officials, congressmen and even a number of their presidential candidates.

Colombia’s military and police did little to offer protection to this putative new voice in politics, and it seemed the country was not ready to embrace a more pluralist form of democracy. The experiment ended, the peace process failed, and Farc returned to arms. The next phase of Farc’s war would see increased kidnappings, urban bombings, allegations of narco-trafficking and the use of minors in combat. This left a bitter legacy for many Colombians, and critics say the accord should include jail terms for crimes against humanity, plus a ban on those so convicted from holding public office. There is also concern that the deal could be undermined by a smaller guerrilla group, the ELN, which has continued a campaign of violence. Organised criminal groups spawned by demobilised rightwing militias pose another potential threat.

Recent opinion polls suggest the public’s endorsement of the deal is by no means certain, with 88% of Colombians polled by Ipsos in early August saying Farc commanders should serve jail time, and 75% saying they should be banned from politics. Half of respondents said they would vote “no” in October, against 39% in favour. A more recent poll showed a tighter contest, with 32% saying “yes” and 29% “no”, and the remainder as yet undecided.

Colombians are also understandably sceptical about the longer-term promises made by both sides. These include Farc’s commitment to help dismantle and discourage the business of drug crops and trafficking. The ability of the government to deliver promised new development programmes, address gross inequalities in the country’s long-neglected rural sector and vanquish the rightwing narcotics gangs is also in doubt.

The fundamental question linking all these issues is whether Colombia’s entrenched ruling establishment – politicians, security forces, business oligarchs and media – can muster the maturity and vision to build a new order on the disputed and still-smoking ruins of the past. As has been seen in South Africa, Northern Ireland and elsewhere, peacemaking is relatively easy compared with long-term peacebuilding.

Justice, reconciliation, reparations and the myriad other aspects of sustainable conflict resolution require a deep, unifying commitment across the board – and a degree of trust that may be currently lacking.

It is right to celebrate last week’s achievement. It is wrong to assume that a lasting, successful and peaceful national settlement will inevitably ensue.