
West Suffolk hospital chose dementia as its annual fundraising campaign in 2014; the My WiSH charity’s Forget-Me-Not campaign set out to raise £25,000 to fund a memory walk within the hospital, but thanks to a fantastic community response we have raised over £95,000.
The Forget-Me-Not Walk is now complete and runs along a 100m stretch of previously uninspiring hospital corridors. The aim of the memory walk is to distract patients, to trigger memories and to help orientate patients to where they can feel safe and confident. The images on the corridor reflect a theme of “through the ages” running from the 1950s to the 1980s depicting national events – cultural, sporting and entertainment – as well as local community images of the towns and villages that West Suffolk hospital serves.
We set up a working party to plan the concept of the walk and to agree on the types of images we wanted to use. Ian Donaghy allowed us to use images from his book Dear Dementia, which help to get the message across to staff and visitors to see the person and not focus on their dementia.
Our local papers, the East Anglian Daily Times and the Mercury, supported the campaign by having a weekly dementia related story which kept the profile of the work we are doing in West Suffolk Hospital in the public eye. The campaign has reduced stigma and raised awareness about dementia both within the hospital and the local community.
Reminiscing about the past can have benefits for all of us, but for people who have dementia it is a way to help them to talk about things that they do remember. Snippets of conversation overheard range from discussions about the blackout in the 1970s to favourite Queen songs inspired by the picture of Freddie Mercury, to looking for familiar faces in local pictures.
A linen cupboard has been disguised behind a picture of Sainsbury’s from the 1970s advertising chickens for 64p per lb and ice cream for 36p. On the opposite wall is the old bus station. Neither building is still in the town centre.
From being a dull corridor at the back of the hospital the Forget-Me-Not Walk has now transformed the area into a local talking point, where you can see patients, visitors and staff in conversations inspired by the images on the walls.

