
If only we could bring back grammar schools, say Tories. If only we could renationalise the railways, laments Labour. And this yearning to return to the past seems hardwired into the human brain in lots of other ways, not just in politics. The blue-remembered hills where life seemed simpler, summers more summery, winters more wintery, people more trusting, children more childlike, sport more sporting, and where pop music was simply better than today, have us all under their spell in different ways.
That’s certainly true of the BBC, which with an uncanny feel for British retrophilia has embarked on a project to remake classic comedies that feels like a well-timed tribute act for post-Brexit Britain. Whoever thought that the camp smut of Are You Being Served?, the liberal naivety of The Good Life or the racial edginess of Till Death Us Do Part could find a new niche in 21st-century Britain? It’s as though the most important invention in modern technology is the rewind button.
Cinema has paved the way for this. What is the Bond franchise if not an enduringly ironic commentary on a diminished Britain’s longing to be taken seriously in the world? This summer’s remake of Ben-Hur feels like a reaching out to the more muscular and manly screen certainties of the 1950s. There’s even a new movie version of Swallows and Amazons. What could be better than that, for those of us who are forever children of the pemmican and grog world?
It is hardly surprising that this powerfully seductive past plays its part in politics too. Nor surprising that in politics it matters especially, but not exclusively, to conservatives. In the United States, for instance, polls show that Trump supporters think America was better in the 1950s and 1960s than it is today. Clinton supporters think things are better today. Americans as a whole think their country’s best year was 2000, because that was the prelapsarian moment before 9/11.








  

The Last Night of the Proms: a ‘strange embodiment’ of our relationship to the past. Photograph: Christie Goodwin/Redferns via Getty Images


Every country addresses the lure of the past differently. Germany uses the past as a warning. France carries the legacy of 1789 as a national responsibility. Russia remains in thrall to its own frustrated uniqueness. Ireland has managed to put the pain and hatred of the past to one side without denying it, wonderfully in my view.
In Britain, lacking a sufficient common culture to transcend differences of class, nation and race, the relationship to the past remains embattled – despite Danny Boyle’s Olympic opening ceremony four years ago. The Last Night of the Proms remains a strange embodiment of all that. This year’s post-Brexit Albert Hall flagwaving will add new layers of touchiness.
Yet both main political traditions in Britain have a narrative of a past to which they wish to return. The Conservative narrative starts in the defiance of 1940 and speaks of the search to reclaim a lost postwar British greatness. Labour’s story starts in 1945 and speaks of a nation drawn together in war and then peace for a common good which has subsequently been mislaid. Both are still searching, to this day.
The Brexit vote in June was not simply about a yearning for the past. It was an expression of anger about the present and hope for the future too. But it cannot be fully understood without grasping the powerful sense among many British voters that the past was better than today. The slogans of regaining control and getting our country back are each rooted in that. It resonates not just with the Tory but with the Labour tradition.
The former Conservative minister David Willetts talks about this syndrome as “bring-backery”. Bring back grammar schools is its most visible manifestation in Tory circles right now, and is certain to get a fresh boost from a perception that this year’s GCSE results show a failing system. But the bring-back agenda goes further. You don’t now hear so much talk as in the 1970s about bringing back flogging, hanging and national service. But conservative cultural values about race, gender, punishment and modernity were the surest correlation with a Brexit vote in June.








  

Theresa May outside number 10 Downing Street shortly after becoming prime minister: her desire to bring back grammar schools undercuts her message ‘not to entrench the advantages of the fortunate few’. Photograph: Peter Nicholls/Reuters


Smart politics recognises this feeling for the past without blinding itself to its limitations. The Times columnist Rachel Sylvester wrote that the biggest danger to Theresa May is the temptation of making nostalgic gestures to propitiate her party. Grammar schools are one of these gestures. It is dangerous not so much because of academic selection in itself, which has its place, but because – whether she intends it or not – the bring-back message undercuts May’s statement outside Number 10 in July that “when it comes to opportunity, we won’t entrench the advantages of the fortunate few”. Outside the Tory bubble it signals same-old Tories.
Yet while it makes obvious sense for Conservatives to seek solace with the past, this has not been true of Labour until now. Historically, Labour has seen itself as a party of the future. Its manifesto in 1945 was entitled Let Us Face the Future. Newness is a recurrent theme of all postwar Labour propaganda, and not just under New Labour. But Labour is in turmoil because so many supporters think it trashed its own past in favour of a valueless newness.
Now, under Jeremy Corbyn, Labour has turned to the past. Corbyn speaks of renationalising the railways, not because it would work well but because he thinks state ownership is right. But it’s as if he wants to hold down that rewind button until we reach the 1970s again, a bit like Life on Mars.
One senses he has not had a genuinely new idea in 40 years and is proud of it. And that he won’t be happy until the coal mines are open again and the NUM is on strike against the National Coal Board too.
In one of my favourite operas, Wagner’s Die Meistersinger, a medieval guild of singers is outraged when someone with new ideas about music comes to town. The newcomer reciprocates his rejection by shunning the old styles and rules. Only the wisest master, Hans Sachs, fully understands – and then only with an effort – that the old and the new both matter alike.
Wagner’s lesson is not to spurn the past but to also always do something new. It was always thus. As in art, so in post-Brexit politics.

