
The reported death of Kadiza Sultana, a student from Bethnal Green who joined Islamic State in Syria last year is a tragic reminder of the role of women in the group’s “caliphate”. The 17-year-old travelled to Syria without her family’s knowledge with two school friends, and details have now emerged of her disillusionment with life in Raqqa, and her desire to return to Britain.
At the age of 16, Sultana and her friends were radicalised online, persuaded to leave their homes, and marry Isis fighters. In the digital age, radicalisation no longer necessitates physical access to extreme preachers or getting hold of jihadi material. Recent research by the Centre on Religion and Geopolitics and Digitalis found that access to extremist content, ranging from Isis magazines, beheading videos, and jihadi manuals, is no more than a Google search away. Counter-narratives to such propaganda are failing to compete. As a result, young, impressionable internet users like Sultana are left vulnerable to dangerous ideologies, even in the supposed safety and security of their own bedrooms.




Female jihadis publish guide to life under Islamic State




According to her family, Sultana was a very bright student with wide opportunities open to her. Extremist ideologies are powerful, not because of the current grievances, but because they seem to offer a utopia. Women all over the globe have been radicalised by Isis, and there is a considerable amount of diversity in their profiles. The notion that all the western women who travel to join Isis are migrating with the sole intention of becoming “jihadi brides” is misleading.
Isis portrays a perfect state, offering solutions to all the world’s problems, and a role to its adherents. Women have been called to join Isis by the “caliph”, Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi, himself, and are offered an important and active role in society. When women feel a disconnect with their current situation or a lack of belonging, a plea to join speaks volumes.
However, in reality, Isis keeps women in domestic isolation; it dictates their identity, declaring how they should live and what role they should have. They must raise children and tend to the house while men are at work; they must not engage in combat, unless attacked; and they should not try to emulate men, nor rule over them. In a recent issue of Isis’s English language magazine, Dabiq, an article condemns the supposed perversion of the western way of life, stating that it has destroyed modesty and chastity, causing women to abandon motherhood, wifehood, femininity, and heterosexuality.








  

‘Images of women seldom appear in Isis propaganda, reflecting their restricted function in the state.’ From left, Kadiza Sultana, Shamima Begum and Amira Abase going through security at Gatwick airport. Photograph: Metropolitan Police/PA


Isis ensures this identity is indoctrinated from a young age. In Isis-controlled schools, boys are trained to become jihadi fighters. Girls, on the other hand, are taught how to cook, clean, raise children, and support their “heroic” husband in his combat. These restricted opportunities channel boys and girls down different routes from a very young age and thus dictate their futures. Although Sultana was not educated by Isis, this is the role that she is likely to have played in the “caliphate”.




The Girl Who Beat Isis: My Story by Farida Khalaf and Andrea C Hoffmann – review




Images of women seldom appear in Isis propaganda, reflecting their restricted function in the state. They have no public profile as Isis’s notions of modesty confine women to the house. Male foreign recruits, even children, have appeared countless times, actively participating in the undertakings of the state. The Bethnal Green schoolgirls, however, appeared to vanish into the abyss after they landed in Turkey, never starring in propaganda videos or demonstrating what they were doing there. When female recruits do appear in Dabiq, it is to write articles condemning western decadence, or glorifying their new home, but rarely to describe the realities of day-to-day life.
Shortly before her death, Sultana is said to have called home and expressed feeling fear and a desire to return. This demonstrates her disenchantment and lack of fulfilment. Given that the utopia she was promised was so distant from reality, it is no surprise that she yearned to leave. Sultana did not get the chance to return to her family, learn from her decisions, or spread that message to others. But perhaps her story will save other girls like her.

