
On Monday, after a long and litigious battle, Gawker will cease to exist. After 14 years, a website that served as a home for many of my journalist colleagues will move into the shadowy archive of internet history. Like an unsightly wedding present, it will still be there but in storage, unloved and unlooked at.
I was but a whippersnapper when I started to work for Gawker in 2007. Nick Denton, the site’s founder, took me to breakfast at Balthazar, in New York, and asked if I would like to run a site for gay men. “Sure,” I said, but I wondered whether it was an issue that I wasn’t gay. Denton said he was surprised I wasn’t, and that it would be, but that maybe I might find a home at Gawker. Thus began a friendship, and gainful employment.
Gawker was a different site in 2007 than it was in its latest, and final, iteration. This was before Denton took it national. Our focus was strictly on the Manhattan media demimonde. Our scope was smaller, but our voice was more powerful.
I was technically an After Hours editor. Choire Sicha, editor of the site at the time, described my remit as “restaurants, dining clubs, chefs, hotels, beignets, sommeliers, meatpackers, gentrification and un-gentrification, and neighborhood culture. And Balthazar.” He added, perhaps gratuitously: “He likes to spend his actual After Hours times with his FEMALE WOMAN GIRLFRIEND. We know!”
I wasn’t at Gawker long. I left after about a year for a few reasons: a rather public affair with a co-worker; Denton’s experimentation with tying compensation to page views; burnout. But mostly because what I discovered after a year was that Gawker was fertile ground for many things – ego, fame, alacrity, wit, a quick turn of phrase – but kindness was not one of them.
Now, it is not for the media to be kind or likable. And Gawker, up until its demise, was rarely confused with being either. However, when you’d run into the people you had mocked, the cost of being neither was tangible. There is no mistaking fear for affection – though as a young man, I am ashamed to admit I preferred the former to the latter.
What made the dynamic even more icky is how symbiotic the relationship between the gawker and the gawked became. Fameballs, as we called them, relied on us for publicity; and we on them, for material. But it didn’t mask the fact that we were – though righteous – bullies.
What ultimately precipitated Gawker’s end might very well have been an act of bullying. Without going over the ethics of public outing, Valleywag, the Gawker of Silicon Valley, made a deadly enemy of Peter Thiel when it outed him in 2007.
But what differentiates bullying from standing up for oneself isn’t the act of aggression itself – which is often indistinguishable – but the power balance between the aggressor and the aggressed.
Between 2007 and 2016, Gawker has much more frequently stuck its thumb in the eye of powerful public figures than it has given noogies to private citizens. The particulars of the method of digital insertion, and into what specific orifice the thumb was stuck, is less important to me than protecting entities such as Gawker, which don’t care who they piss off. Power doesn’t come clean or easy for anyone – not for Gawker and not for Thiel. So the powerful, by definition, deserve to be gawked at. Why villainise the gawker when it is the obscene accumulation of wealth and privilege that is truly obscene?
My regret – beyond concern for Denton, who believe it or not is an extremely sweet man (albeit one whose thick English accent and penchant for mumbling means I rarely understand what he says) – is that the Gawker of which I was a part did nothing noble. We were big fish in a little pond; I was young, calling phonies phoney, blind to the fact that I had become a bully. That does not mean, however, that Gawker didn’t go on to do great and important things, and it does not mean it will not be missed.

