
Moving house is like someone (usually you, you are the agent of this destruction) has taken everything you own, and disassembled it. In the week the move happens, it’s chaos.
Everything is in bags and boxes at your feet. Where is the notebook that you need to use today? The pair of shoes you want to wear? Your wallet? The prescription? The necklace you love?
You’re disassembled as well – you lose your bearings. That’s how it feels in the week that you move. You’re like Mike Teavee in Charlie and the Chocolate Factory where he gets split into a thousand tiny pixels and transported through time and space and ends up in another dimension. It’s a rough ride. There he is a little later, reassembled but smaller, not right somehow, in the television set.




The term 'crazy' shouldn't be thrown around lightly – ask any woman




In this state of profound confusion (where is my phone? where is my scarf?) you need a guardian angel. What comes instead is a more chancy form of helper, one in whom you need to place a profound amount of trust: the movers, or as we call them in Australia, the removalists.
I have moved more than 60 times. Here are six things I’ve learned.
Movers don’t always turn up
You have to be out of your house on Thursday. Someone else is moving in on Friday. So you’re packed and ready to go. The removalists said they’d be there in the morning. You call and they say they’re “on their way.” You call later and they don’t answer.
Night falls. They’re still not there. You’re crying. Where are the removalists? Where are the removalists?! Where are the removalists?! You have to clean the flat. You need your bond back. Someone else is moving into your flat in a few hours. Maybe you can take their removalist? But where are your removalists? The call centre worker talks over your weeping and says they are “out on a job”. What is this immense job that is taking all day? Are they moving an entire city?
All that’s left for you to do is move your stuff out onto the nature strip and sleep outside on your stripey bags, guarding your stuff overnight, getting covered in dew, and hoping the removalists will arrive in the morning.
You can’t always find them
You can save money on interstate removals by backloading your things on a truck that’s returning to the city you’re moving to with an empty load. But – as I discovered when moving to Sydney from Melbourne in 2014 – the company you deal with can be just another third party who has “no idea” where the truck is. They are as clueless as you as to the whereabouts of your removalists. 
You must always ask when booking a van: “Will you be able to provide me the phone number of the removalists in the event of a query or crisis?”
Storage is your friend
When the removalist doesn’t come and you are in said crisis because you have to be out of your home, put everything in storage until you can sort it out. Storage facilities are worth every cent for the peace of mind while you find another way to get your things to your new house.
The alternatives are difficult
You’re sick of removalists and their lies about how they’ll be there “just after we finish this job”. So you decide to do it yourself. It doesn’t matter that you don’t drive, and have no friends to help you.
You can move via taxi or on public transport!
We’ve all seen some guy struggle with lifting a bookcase onto a tram, bus or train – looking dangerously close to poking someone in the eye with the sharp end, struggling to keep hold of it arounds corners or sharp brakes. I’ve been that person.
My advice for moving furniture via public transport is that buses are difficult but trains are good if you pick stations that have lifts – don’t try and carry unwieldy furniture on escalators. If you live in Melbourne, trams are the easiest transport for furniture removal, owing to front and back door options and the small number of steps needed to get on and off. 
Avoid peak hour on all modes of public transport. 




What a strange, horrible sensation it is to binge read my dusty old diaries | Brigid Delaney




The other alternative is taxis (I have not tried to move via Uber yet). Call and book a large taxi. Do not say it is for furniture removal purposes. When the taxi arrives and sees that you are expecting to do at least six trips to load up your stuff, and that you are transporting items such as lamps, boxes of books, large plastic stripey bags, your driver may get angry and feel “used.” Tell the driver they will get a tip. Give them $50 at destination, and they may help you move the things into your new place.
You are ALONE in the world
Nothing makes you feel so friendless as moving. When you move as often as I do, people stop volunteering to help. Hey, I get it, life’s short and furniture is heavy. But the moving process then becomes a profoundly existential – a lonely and alienating experience as you ruminate about how everyone would come to your party when you had free drinks, but no one would come to your house to empty, clean and lift a fridge onto a truck. This may be why the intense bond I feel with good removalists feels stronger than some of the best friendships of my life. It’s because they (the removalists) were there for me, when no one else was.
When you find a good removalist
Dad’s advice is always “have a case of cold beer to give the removalists for the end of their shift, they’ve earnt it.”
What I give good removalists when they deliver my stuff on time – without it disappearing, being smashed up, without it getting wet (how did the removalists in 2010 manage to deliver boxes of WET books? Did they put the top down on their truck as they were coasting down the highway?) – is hugs, a tip, beer, a positive review on all forms of social media, and the promise that when I move again, I will get in touch.

