Two months have passed since the 23 June Brexit vote, and nothing is clearer now than it was then about how both the UK and the EU will go about tackling a momentous challenge. Just as no clear scenario was ever laid out for Britain’s future in a post-Brexit world, there has been little preparation for how the other 27 member states would deal with the aftermath. Much of this has to do with the very shock of a vote many hoped would go the other way. Still, stark realities are now catching up with slick slogans.

Just as it is hard to exaggerate the recklessness or downright ignorance of those who promised a painless Brexit, it is hard to ignore that European partners find themselves at a loss when it comes to charting the next steps for the continent. With the summer pause drawing to an end, these flaws and omissions are coming to the fore – as an informal summit on Monday between the leaders of Germany, France and Italy partly illustrated.

For his meeting with Angela Merkel and François Hollande, meant to pave the way to next month’s EU summit, the Italian prime minister Matteo Renzi chose the historical site of Ventotene, off the coast of Naples. There, the three EU leaders paid respects at the tomb of Altiero Spinelli, an Italian anti-fascist activist who, while in detention in 1941, started writing a manifesto for a federation of European states. Written on sheets of cigarette paper and hidden in a tin box, the manifesto was smuggled out of prison and circulated among the Italian resistance – it has been described as one of the founding documents for Europe’s turn away from confrontation and towards unity.

That symbolical gestures may be sought to allay worries that the EU has come one dangerous step closer to disintegration as a result of the Brexit vote is hardly surprising. Yet it is substance, not just images of diplomatic choreography, that governments now need to produce. Right after the vote, there were continental calls to give the EU “a new impulse” and to heed a “wake-up call”. One line of thought even claimed that, with the British on their way out, further integration would become an easier option. Not so. Brexit has brought more, not fewer problems to the EU – not least because the whole separation process drains collective energy. Continental Europe is as divided as it was before the referendum. France and Italy may nurture ideas about fiscal transfers and ambitious European investment plans to boost growth, but there is no more German willingness on display for that today than there was before the British vote.

Whatever the topic, be it anti-terrorism, defence or migration, the EU-27 are well aware they need to demonstrate pragmatism, not lofty ideals, if they want to convince increasingly sceptical voters that the European project can deliver. With key elections due in France and Germany next year, and the growing pressure exerted by populist movements, calls for “more” Europe are bound to run up against political obstacles that Brexit has done nothing to alleviate. “Better” Europe sounds like a good slogan – but like other slogans, such as “take back control”, no one is able to formulate what they mean exactly, nor how to translate them into hard facts. Britain may not have voted Brexit with a very clear idea of what it wanted it to mean. But the EU is also struggling to connect vision and reality.