
I come from an Aboriginal mission called Wreck Bay in the ACT.
When I was growing up the gates were still up. These gates kept our people on the mission, and locked others out. At seven in the morning they opened, and at seven each night they closed.
When I was a little older, they took the gates down. That is, they took the actual gates themselves off, but the posts remained: a big square arch.
The mission manager was trying to tell us we were free to come and go as we pleased, but the posts had the same effect as the gates that preceded them.
 So I grew up on the mission, and went to a small mission school.
 Later on they transferred all of the kids from the mission over and mixed us with the naval base children, and we made a lot of friends.
 Being kids, we thought it was great that we were going to mix with all of these other, non-Aboriginal kids, but unbeknownst to us there was huge ruckus in the non-Aboriginal community because they didn’t want their kids mixing with Aboriginal kids.




Gratuitous emphasis on race: why Bill Leak's cartoon fails to be meaningful | Jack Latimore




 My first week at this school – this was when I was in Year Four – my teacher stood me out in front of the class and said:
 “You see this boy? He’s stupid.
“He’s got no initiative.
“He’s never going to go anywhere in life, and you shouldn’t grow up like him.”
Obviously, to hear that as a young kid, that hurt, and it’s stuck with me, and it’s probably something that’s motivated me to be where I am today.
When I saw that cartoon in the Australian the other week, as an Aboriginal father, as a father to Aboriginal children, I felt insulted. I felt sad, in many ways.
It’s sad that people think it’s okay to do that.
To be demonised in that fashion, to me, it felt like that teacher that told me I wasn’t worth anything, that I wasn’t going to amount to anything, who told the class don’t grow up like this boy.
I always try to look at things from a glass-half-full perspective. If there’s a lesson somewhere in this situation, then some good can come out of it.
The way in which our community has reacted, particularly with the #IndigenousDads campaign and those positive stories and photos, is a fantastic example of that.
That extends to the way a lot of Australians have reacted including non-Aboriginal people who were hurt by that cartoon. The good people out there who said, “You know what? That’s a racist and cruel image, and it’s cast on all of the people out there who have a social conscience and who care about people as human beings.”
Personally, I’d like to think there’s more people who think that way than the people who would look at it and laugh, and say, “Yeah. That’s just blackfullas for you.”
When I look at that cartoon I don’t see anything in it that relates to my family. My parents taught me patience, and tolerance, and good manners, and how to communicate properly with people, and to treat others as you would want yourself to be treated. That’s the way it is in my family, and it’s never left us.
That’s not to say it doesn’t disturb me, but at the same time – however unfortunate it is – that’s a fact of life for us. There’ll be worse cartoons than that in the future, and I’m pretty sure there’s been worse cartoons in the past.
Our attitude has to be how can we face this adversity and make things better for ourselves? It’s always got to be about improving ourselves, and sometimes we need to do that by proving other people wrong.
That idea of self-development is probably something that we don’t often consider when we talk about self-determination.
It’s something that really helps me believe in things like the Family Matters campaign. In having the ability to mobilise our organisations and services we can mobilise other people, and really empower our parents in the long term.
With Family Matters we have a national campaign to ensure kids grow up safe and cared for in family, community and culture. Our aim is to eliminate the over-representation of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander children in out-of-home care within a generation.
The real strength of Family Matters is that the campaign is led by over 120 Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander and non-Indigenous organisations from across the country.
If a campaign can bring structure and direction out of peak bodies and other organisations – and even individuals – to want to strive to do better, then we’ll come up with effective ideas and solutions-based angles and help our communities on the ground to help themselves.
We’ve seen it time after time: it’s just not possible to go out by yourself and change the entire world, but it is possible to go in and empower people, and listen, and get local solutions for local problems, and work on how best to put those solutions into action.
It’s going to have to happen from the ground up, and it’s going to have to be led by Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people.
Government can chuck as much money at problems as they like, but they’ve been doing that for a long time, and the results haven’t satisfied anybody.
It’s a bit like those gate posts from the mission: one group seeing something from a very different perspective from the other.
They just need to listen better and get our people to help develop their solutions, rather than have governments saying, “I’m going to put a committee in place, and they’re going to come up with great ideas, and we’re going to get good policies,” and then going back to the community to say, “Boy! Have we got a deal for you!”




I'm an Aboriginal father. I don't want my kids to see racist garbage in the media | Luke Pearson




The only way these things work is when our communities are leading discussions; when our knowledge, expertise and understanding is being utilised. It should always be about community-led decision-making and community control.
A key component of the Family Matters membership structure is the use of jurisdictional working groups, which are engaged at state and territory level, to drive change in accordance with the campaign priorities.
Ensuring that Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people and organisations have control over decisions that affect their children is vital in supporting, healing and strengthening our families.
 We shouldn’t underestimate the positive impact that involvement, and that sense of accomplishment, can have on an individual or a community.
 I caught up with that headmaster – the one that introduced me as the stupid boy to the class on my first day – years later, as we were both walking down the main street.
 He said, “Young Moorey, what are you doing with yourself these days?”
 “It’s funny you should mention, sir. I just came back from a United Nations conference in Greenland.”
 We had a discussion about my trip, and while he struggled to articulate it, I could tell that he had a bit of a think about things. He congratulated me.
 I’d felt empowered, and proud, and he’d had his perceptions shifted.
“Our stories, our way”: each week, a new guest hosts the @IndigenousX Twitter account to discuss topics of interest to them as Aboriginal and/or Torres Strait Islander people. In partnership with IndigenousX, we’re inviting the weekly host to tell us about who they are, what they are passionate about, and what they have in store during their upcoming week as @IndigenousX

