11:04

It’s the day met with a mix of fear and anticipation by students everywhere: GCSE results day. It comes shortly after A-level grades are released, and marks the end of exam result season for many. But how much does what you get really matter?

The Guardian’s Secret Teacher argued earlier this month that bad grades are not the end of the world. “What do exams actually test anyway? Memory, certainly. They test time management. They test elements of competence in individual subjects. But, ultimately, they really test how good a person is at sitting exams,” they wrote.

It’s true that academic success isn’t the be-all and end-all. After all everyone from successful writer Julie Burchill to media mogul Simon Cowell dropped out of school. Even Jeremy Clarkson spoke out about disappointing A-level results last week, tweeting: “Don’t worry. I got a C and two Us, and I’m currently on a superyacht in the Med.”

Sometimes not getting the grades you want can lead to better things. Carrie, 28, spoke to the guardian about missing out on her first choice university because of not getting the right grades, and ending up on a completely different path. She took a year out and eventually enjoyed a fulfilling art degree, instead of English which she’d originally set her sights on. She said: “It will only be okay – maybe even bloody amazing – if you make it work for you ... There is a reason for everything and a huge adventure awaits.”

However, Frances Ryan argued that grades do matter for some – especially in our unequal society. She wrote: “Of course, a formal education is no guarantee of a fulfilling career or decent wage, and disappointing A-level results are not the end of the world (really, they’re not). But focusing on individual examples of success distracts from the bigger picture: the multiple obstacles that rig the system and lets society off the hook for eliminating them.”

What’s more, others have argued telling students exam results don’t matter is dangerous because there is still a value placed upon academic success in the highly competitive modern workplace.

What do you think? Do grades still matter or are they less important in modern times? Did you succeed through other means? Join us from 12pm-2pm today to discuss. You’re also able to take part by filling out the form below.