
Last Friday, across the UK, activists in support of Black Lives Matter UK blockaded some of the busiest roads in Europe: the M4 near Heathrow airport, the A45 near Birmingham airport, and tram lines in Nottingham. Across the three cities, 19 people were arrested. Rallies were held that evening in London.
We aren’t a party. We aren’t members. We are a group of people who think that black lives matter. All black lives.

In the UK we have a system where the people that end up dead in or following police custody after the use of force, are disproportionately black and brown. And that system keeps getting tweaked.




Why activists brought the Black Lives Matter movement to the UK




The use of adhesive tape as a restraint has been prohibited since the 1993 death of Joy Gardner, who was bound with 13 feet of Elastoplast by police. Further training on positional asphyxia has been given since the 2003 death of Andrew Jordan who was held in the same position by police for about 10 minutes. The use of the double seated embrace restraint in child prisons has been phased out since the 2004 death of teenager Gareth Myatt from positional asphyxia. Following the death of three-year-old Aylan Kurdi in 2015, who was drowned attempting to cross from Turkey to Greece by boat, David Cameron planned to allow 20,000 Syrian refugees into the UK over a five-year period. In 2016 so far, more than 3,100 refugees have died in the Mediterranean.
In response to our day of action last week, where we protested under banners of Mark Duggan, Jermaine Baker, and Azelle Rodney – all shot by the British police – many argue that state sanctioned violence in the UK is not as bad as in the US.











Black Lives Matter: ‘One day the chains will be broken’ – video interview


Comparing countries in this way means that we miss the links. Britain tightens its borders while it reaps the benefits of its colonial past, invades countries whose rebuilding contracts will be won by British development firms, and manufactures weapons that are used on civilian populations by the British state and key allies. Rhetoric that migrants and asylum seekers keep Britain in recession fuelled the Brexit campaign, and hate crimes have increased 57% since the referendum. This rhetoric obscures the fact that Britain has contributed towards wars that create refugees, and that during recession multinational corporations keep getting richer.




Black Lives Matter UK rally in three cities – in pictures




According to the campaign group Inquest, one person in England and Wales dies in police custody or following police contact every six days . Tweaking the system is not working, and perhaps it is because we are asking the wrong questions. Rather than asking how long you can restrain someone before they asphyxiate, let’s ask why children are in prisons at all; why people cannot stay in the UK with their families; why black people are up to 17 times more likely than non-black counterparts to be stopped and searched; and what we can do to value ourselves and each other while we are told that our lives don’t matter.
People keep asking us what is next for Black Lives Matter UK. This is only the beginning. This is us building and growing a movement for black lives. There is plenty of room for people to get involved. Join us.
• This article was amended on 31 August 2016 to clarify two references to deaths in custody. The subheading was also amended.

