On 31 August 1941, 75 years ago, the first Arctic convoy arrived in Archangel. A handful of merchant ships carried raw materials and Hawker Hurricane fighters, the first instalment of lend-lease that was to shore up the Soviet defences against Hitler. On board one of the merchant vessels was the Polish-born artist Feliks Topolski, accompanied by several war reporters. The political and propaganda intentions, as well as the military purpose of the convoys, were easy to spot.

Over the next four years, 78 convoys sailed to deliver essential supplies to Britain’s new ally. The losses were terrible: 85 merchant ships, 16 Royal Navy vessels and as many as 3,000 sailors; the supplies were never enough to meet Soviet demands. The conditions were diabolical, not just from cold. In summer the eternal daylight left no place to hide from the constant threat of German aircraft. The convoys had to survive submarine and surface attack while fighting the turbulence of the Arctic Ocean as it meets the warmer waters of the Atlantic. The handful of men who still survive deserve the British medal that the Ministry of Defence finally conceded three years ago.

Most official commemorations of second world war battles are intended to shape the future as well as honour the fallen of the past. This week’s Arctic convoy ceremony (for which Princess Anne will travel to Murmansk) also serves a political as well as a military end: it is to amplify Russia’s significance as the conqueror of fascism.

Over the past decade the growing attention paid to the convoys has kept time with Vladimir Putin’s careful rehabilitation of Stalin and Stalinism. Only last week the Volgograd regional governor approved the idea of renaming the international airport Stalingrad, putting the city’s old name, erased in 1961 after Stalin was denounced, back on the map. Schools are soon to have a new history syllabus that will give a “balanced” view of the dictator.

And along with the well-publicised awards of the Ushakov medal to survivors, Wednesday’s commemoration is meant to remind Europe that Russia still sees itself as standard bearer in the fight against fascism, a war demanding eternal vigilance. That past deserves honour. But it does not justify the actions or the policies of Mr Putin’s regime today.