To the editor: Like it or not, the writing is on the Republicans' wall: Donald Trump is their reality. Now, after winning Indiana, even his biggest critics must concede that he is the party's presumptive nominee. ("Some still resist, but many Republicans come to terms with their new reality: It's Trump," May 5)

One has to admit that Trump's meteoric ascent, without ever having held elected office and by thrashing his political heavyweight opponents, is indeed an unprecedented feat in U.S. political history.

The question is now, will this thunderbolt momentum continue in the general election against Democrat Hillary Clinton? So far, Trump has proved all the pundits totally wrong. The absurdity of Trump's political manifesto and the vague promise to “make America great again” are what appeal most to voters who have lost faith in the Republican establishment and are willing to bet that Trump will be able to wave his magic wand for their benefit.

I think Trump will continue to surprise. His ability to unleash verbosity and pugnacity in ways that no other nominee has is unfortunately his biggest selling point.

Atul M. Karnik, Woodside, N.Y.

..

To the editor: Carly Fiorina, we hardly knew ye. You came on board as the running mate just before roiling political seas capsized Sen. Ted Cruz's leaky ship .

But don't fret. Now you can watch safely from the campaign's shore as Trump's Titanic sails ever more erratically into its maiden political voyage.

Whomever Captain Trump picks as his first mate, say a prayer for him or her. And rejoice, for your heart will go on.

Sandra Perez, Santa Maria

..

To the editor: Trump's candidacy is God's IQ test for the United States.

If a bigoted, misogynistic liar with designs on the 1st Amendment, fraternity-level temperament and total ignorance of diplomacy is seen as “the answer” to our problems, we may need an ark.

Arlan Cohen, Pasadena

..

To the editor: Jonah Goldberg complains that Trump “almost never uses the language of traditional American conservatism, with its emphasis on … limited government.” ("To beat Trumpism, denationalize our politics," Opinion, May 3)

This is true. What Goldberg fails to point out is that all politicians do the same thing.

Americans of all political persuasions love the protections of Social Security, Medicare, unemployment insurance and Medicaid. You rarely hear a politician advocating for the repeal of any of these programs. They're way too popular, and they're all Big Government programs.

The truth is, Americans are overwhelmingly supportive of Big Government. In this sense, there's actually a broad consensus in the United States. I find it amazing that Goldberg doesn't recognize this.

Spike Kaplansky, Sherman Oaks

..

To the editor: Despairing the almost assured nomination of Trump and unable to accept Hillary Clinton as a lesser evil, Goldberg turns toward a seeming way out. Glowingly referencing National Affairs editor Yuval Levin's recent book, he argues for “localism” as a new way forward.

Too bad there's nothing new about this concept, which has gone under different names, most notably “state's rights” and “nullification.” It hit its apex in the 1860s before the first Republican president did something about it.

Richard Olmstead, Van Nuys

Follow the Opinion section on Twitter @latimesopinion and Facebook