To the editor: While it is easy to understand criticism of Republican presidential candidate Donald Trump from Latinos objecting to his views on illegal immigration and border wall building, those I saw on TV at the GOP front-runner's rally in Costa Mesa on Thursday looked more like hooligans than activists. ("Latino activists vow more Trump protests as tensions heighten," April 30)

To me an activist is a thoughtful, determined person passionately advocating a particular position or cause. Activism is not jumping on police cars, driving recklessly, challenging police or harassing passing motorists.

Imagine if a mob of tea party supporters acted in a similar fashion at rallies for Democratic candidates Bernie Sanders or Hillary Clinton. Would they be labeled activists?

Glynn Morris, Playa del Rey

..

To the editor: I heard at the last minute about the anti-Trump rally in Costa Mesa last week. I wanted to go, but I caved to being tired after work. Still, I hoped there'd be a sizable presence against him.

Imagine my surprise when the cameras panned the crowd and I noticed no white faces. Your article totally glossed over this issue, noting only that Latinos “and others” are upset by Trump's attacks on illegal immigrants and his plans to build a giant wall.

I'm upset, and I don't think opposing Trump is only a Latino responsibility. I'm sure some white people reject Trump's dangerous drivel. Can I get a “Trump go home!” from one of them? Do you think Latinos don't notice the massive wall of silence from L.A.'s privileged class?

If you don't like Trump, say so stridently and often. If you want to stick it to him, make him a “huge” loser in the Golden State on June 7.

Laura Brown, Pasadena

..

To the editor: Here's my plea to Trump protesters: Ignore him.

Trump cannot stand to go unnoticed, and the protesters provide him with even more free press as a result of their disruptions. Much like a fire that will extinguish by itself when deprived of oxygen, those who passionately oppose Trump can deprive him of much-needed attention.

Trump is very effective at keeping his name out in front with inflammatory remarks and outlandish rhetoric. Without protesting crowds, controversy and extra security, there wouldn't be much to report, and the press would be forced to cover something more interesting.

Trump's opponents should put their frustrations where they can do some good, perhaps by supporting a candidate who could use their help and has some ideas they can get behind.

Marianne Finch, Huntington Beach

Follow the Opinion section on Twitter @latimesopinion and Facebook