To the editor: Many thanks to The Times for its careful analysis of the political strategy of Republican presidential candidate Donald Trump. Who would have thought that Trump's cruel comedy could be more effective than the shovel-ready rhetoric of a Sen. Ted Cruz (R-Texas) or the repeated bad-mouthings of Hillary Clinton by everyone else? ("All the campaign is a stage for Donald Trump," Jan. 29)

From now on, all successful politicians will need to do a stint as a stand-up comedian before venturing onto the political stage.

Angus Andrews, Westlake Village

..

To the editor: It was a bad decision on Trump's part to excuse himself from the debate Thursday night. It was a “Real Housewives of Iowa” move.

Presidents need to be able to stand in the fire when things get tough and participate in difficult conversations. Would he flee from meetings with foreign leaders on issues such as war and nuclear arms?

In every debate Trump has been a “mean boy,” and it baffles me that he's the Republican front-runner.

The real issue here is that Trump cannot intelligently talk about the issues. What he showed us on Thursday was his lack of leadership. He took his ball and went home. That's not the type of president and leader we need. Even Cruz began to crumble by threatening to leave the stage if he didn't like the questions.

These debates have been nothing more than a combination of a circus and reality-TV meanness.

Lisa Sanchez, Pasadena

..

To the editor: The Times convincingly points out that all the world is a stage for Trump as a stand-up comedian.

My complaint against Trump is not that he is an excellent stand-up comedian, but that he is principally a financier whose major goal is to convince television networks their best way to optimize their revenues is to provide formats that he finds acceptable in their political coverage of the race for the presidency.

My thought is that Trump is not as motivated to achieve specific political objectives as he is motivated to subsequently be able to say that he won the presidential contest.

Marc Jacobson, Los Angeles

..

To the editor: Trump says he wants to make America great again, yet he's the greatest trash talker of our country.

He does not address poverty, homelessness, racism, the spiraling cost of medicine, infrastructure or gun violence. He brags about the polls, his wealth, the wall he's going to build, the 11 million people he's going to expel, the stupidity of our leaders and the “great people” like Sarah Palin he's going to surround himself with.

America doesn't need a comedian or demigod; we need a grounded leader who is truthful and offers solutions.

Paul Shubunka, Santa Clarita

Follow the Opinion section on Twitter @latimesopinion and Facebook