To the editor: Nancy Cohen puts forth the typical but defective argument about why women should vote for Democratic presidential candidate Hillary Clinton: It's in our best interest, and women take the lead on women's issues. ("Why women should vote for women," Opinion, April 6)

As a 69-year-old woman, I wish I could agree with Cohen, but we know that sometimes female politicians are not good advocates for women.

Right now in Congress, Rep. Marsha Blackburn (R-Tenn.) is leading a House select committee that is trying to put a stop to fetal tissue research. Her committee has issued subpoenas to hospitals and other medical facilities demanding the names of researchers. This can only intimidate those who are dedicated to finding cures for diseases such as ALS (commonly known as Lou Gehrig's disease), Alzheimer's, Parkinson's and multiple sclerosis. In several states, it is women legislators who are leading the charge to restrict abortion rights and women's healthcare options. Female governors have signed bills further restricting healthcare, food stamps and other critical programs.

I am a woman who strongly supports Sen. Bernie Sanders for president. He has worked for civil rights, women's healthcare and equal pay. If that doesn't make him a feminist, what does?

Carol Gendel, San Marcos

..

To the editor: Take heed, women voters — Cohen's view is right on. Women have to behold and preserve their dignity and well-being at all cost.

“Female leaders advance rights and opportunity for women and girls to a degree that men do not.” Read this until it seeps in. It is our only salvation. Let's have someone of our gender in women's corner for a change .

Lois Eisenberg, Valencia

..

To the editor: I wonder what Cohen would say if Carly Fiorina were still in the race.

Cohen restates the myth of income inequality, ignoring the data that show women on average work fewer hours per week and choose college majors that lead to lower-paying careers and professions that allow for more flexibility. Women in college outnumber men. If the income gap were true, why wouldn't every employer hire only women and save that mythical 22 cents per dollar they pay men?

Cohen misses the most important issue on voting for any candidate, woman or otherwise: Does she or he share my values? Clinton most certainly does not, and I will not vote for her.

Lisa Niedenthal, Los Angeles

..

To the editor: I find Cohen's print edition headline — “Women should vote for women” — to be simplistic and counterproductive.

A candidate being a woman in no way guarantees her having a progressive agenda. One need only look at Margaret Thatcher. I find it difficult to even mention Fiorina when discussing what's good for women.

Then again, when it comes to a person who represents a truly progressive agenda for all women and men, one need look no further than Sen. Elizabeth Warren (D-Mass.). She also happens to be a woman.

Robert Greene, Woodland Hills

..

To the editor: I've been a woman all my life. We should vote for the candidate who will be the best president, regardless of gender, religion and so forth. Anything else is blatant discrimination.

We should be better than what Cohen wants.

Marty Motia, La Cañada Flintridge

Follow the Opinion section on Twitter @latimesopinion and Facebook