To the editor: Two of the great horrors of western civilization are dealt with quite differently by their nations’ veterans associations. (“Confederate flags have no place flying over national cemeteries,” editorial, May 30)

In Germany, no veterans organizations fly the Nazi flag. Along with the rest of Germany’s population, they are embarrassed by this disgraceful period in their history. People there do not ask to display the swastika flag in honor of their grandfather’s sacrifice in World War II.

In the southern states of America, the flag representing the short-lived nation that fought for human slavery is revered by millions. Its supporters say that it doesn’t represent slavery but rather states’ rights and respect for the fallen.

Embarrassed? Not so much.

Vince Scully, Long Beach

..

To the editor: Your editorial criticizes not only the modern use of the Confederate battle flag by racists, but also the “treasonous” Confederates themselves. You deny there is any good reason to fly the rebel flag over the graves of those who died under it.

Military cemeteries around the world respect not only the victors but also the vanquished. Furthermore, the Stars and Stripes is a flag born from the treason of some colonists against the English crown.

And closer to home, may I remind you that the early Californians in June 1846 were also treasonous toward Mexico, the sovereign power under which they lived, and declared that California had seceded from Mexico.

If the flags of traitors are to be banned, what do we do about the Bear Flag of the California Republic?

Kim Stevens, San Pedro

..

To the editor: I can’t think of a more relevant or significant editorial to honor the men and women who have died serving our country. Thank you.

I’m so sick of the southern states and their political leaders with their no-compromise obstructionism in Congress and their sabotage of consensus democracy. There is no good reason to honor the rebel flag on Memorial Day or any other day.

Alan Segal , San Diego

Follow the Opinion section on Twitter @latimesopinion and Facebook