To the editor: Presumptive Republican presidential nominee Donald Trump makes a lot of money attaching his name to schemes such as Trump University, Trump Mortgage and even Trump Vodka, as if it represents some sort of five-star seal of approval. (Re “Trump’s failed Baja resort fits business pattern,” June 27)

Now we learn of one more: Trump Ocean Resort in Baja California, Mexico.

Trump portrays himself as a rich and successful businessman, but as his record demonstrates, he is a huckster who has attached his name to any number of disreputable enterprisesto make a buck. Is that likely to change if he’s elected president?

He is a cardboard cutout, all talk and no substance, and he would love to hang a Trump sign on the White House. This November voters should say, “No deal.”

John Trask, Thousand Oaks

::

To the editor: Your daily assault on Trump shows your liberal bias.

Along with some friends, I was one of those investors, in the Trump Ocean Resort. I blame my loss on two things: a bad real estate market in 2007-’10, and my stupidity to buy anything in Mexico.

Why don’t you concentrate on likely Democratic nominee Hillary Clinton’s questionable activities? I challenge you to publish a list of the already known foreign governments that have donated money to the Clinton Foundation. If you can’t find this data, call me and I’ll provide it.

You are persecuting the mouse while the elephant runs wild.

Kenneth L. Zaccaria, Westlake Village

::

To the editor: Anyone who needs further evidence of Trump’s questionable business practices should watch the 2012 documentary, “You’ve been Trumped.”

The film reports what happened in Scotland beginning in the years after 2000. Trump heralded his “most spectacular” double golf course, with hotels and housing, that would bring jobs and prosperity to the area. The course was to be built on an ecologically sensitive coastal land.

Area residents were were bullied and harassed — some had their water and electricity cut off — when they protested this intrusion and refused to give up their land. Great stretches of the irreplaceable dunes were bulldozed, but the project was abandoned.

Perhaps a comment made by Trump that was caught on camera indicated one reason for his short attention to the project: He stated he was thinking of running for president.

Bridget Tucker, San Bernardino

::

To the editor: With which of the following groups will Donald Trump be associated?

A: Washington, Lincoln, Kennedy, Reagan.

B: Charles Keating, Barry Minkow, Bernie Madoff, P.T. Barnum.

Marc Glucksman, Los Angeles

Follow the Opinion section on Twitter @latimesopinion and Facebook