Readers aren't taking Ted Cruz seriously.

The Republican senator from Texas and multi-state runner up to Donald Trump in the GOP primary probably won't receive his party's nomination for president, but he's decided to designate a running mate anyway: Carly Fiorina.

Pundits elsewhere have busied themselves with sophisticated analyses of Cruz's political calculation, but Times letter writers in California familiar with the ex-Hewlett Packard chief who tried and failed in 2010 to unseat Democratic Sen. Barbara Boxer have reacted more lightheartedly. Here are some of their letters.

Jeff Pollak of La Crescenta puts a positive spin on Cruz's move:

The news that Cruz has chosen Fiorina as his running mate has raised eyebrows, caused heads to shake and tongues to wag, and brought chuckles to almost the entire country. But there are some positives that shouldn't be overlooked:

- This gives Fiorina something to do other than fire a few thousand people, should she ever attain another CEO position.

- She does make a perfect choice for a ticket that will never actually come up for election anywhere in the U.S.

- Cruz gets to once again display his exceptional tactical mind, which operates like no other in his make-believe world.

- If the idea was for Fiorina to bark at Trump as she did during her brief presidential candidacy, she can finally do something millions of other Americans will agree with.

- With Fiorina on board, Cruz's small chance of winning a majority of Republican votes in California has actually shrunk.

Rich Capparela of Santa Monica anticipates Trump's response:

Cruz chooses his running mate -- in April. Not to be outdone, Trump has announced he is running for re-election.

Los Angeles resident Tracy Nadeau dings the Cruz camp:

Cruz choosing Fiorina as a vice presidential running mate is truly the political equivalent to hitching a broken wagon to a dead horse.

Oren M. Spiegler of Upper Saint Clair, Penn., offers some serious criticism:

When Trump criticized Fiorina's physical appearance, I found her to be a highly sympathetic figure. No more: Fiorina has chosen a different type of ugliness by running with the loathsome Cruz.

Cruz is the man of government shutdowns, deportation, the marginalization of gay men and women and religious minorities and, in contravention of the advice of military experts, carpet bombing the Middle East to the point that we'd find out if “sand can glow in the dark.”

He has stated that a person who does not “begin every day on his knees” is not qualified to be president. Like his cohorts, he has proposed tax “reform” that is unworkable and not fiscally sound. One of his more absurd promises is to bring French fries back to school cafeterias.

I now agree on a limited basis with Trump in his reference to Fiorina: “Who would vote for that?”

Follow the Opinion section on Twitter @latimesopinion and Facebook