To the editor: What a surprise. When an ill-conceived, vaguely specified and overly ambitious project is rushed to be contracted without detailed planning, bidders will submit a low price knowing that future engineering change orders will provide opportunities to inflate the costs well into the profit zone. (“Chunk of change,” March 28)

The Madera/Fresno link as a proof of concept has, in fact, proved a vision of the future cost of the bullet train.

Wait for it.

Gordon Osborne, Woodland Hills

::

To the editor: Thanks to Ralph Vartabedian and The Times for keeping us informed about the slow-motion runaway train wreck that is high-speed rail.

I think of the environmental and other damages that it will cause to provide the small percentage of the population that will use it with a heavily subsidized alternative to airlines or driving.

There are more needed infrastructure projects such as water systems and local transportation and transit projects that would give the taxpayers more bang for their buck.

Search “boondoggle”; a bigger or better fit is hard to find.

Murry I. Rozansky, Chatsworth

::

To the editor: We need to focus on the basic questions: “Why build a bullet train, and, is this the best use of our resources?”

If the goal of the train is to reduce congestion and pollution while contributing to economic growth, we need to ask ourselves whether expanding local transit systems wouldn't be more productive.

We are also facing a lack of funding, but not a lack of rhetoric, regarding housing for the homeless, as well as a water crisis.

We need to set priorities.

Kevin Minihan, Los Angeles

::

To the editor: I believe the high number of change orders facing the bullet train clearly reflects the governor's push to start building his legacy train too early and without an alignment or approved plans.

By starting construction without adequate funding or the people's support, he hoped it would be carried to completion and burnish his legacy.

Rob Hamers, Irvine

::

To the editor: Now that I've seen recent articles about cost overruns for the bullet train, I will be looking for other news in The Times of the same earth-shattering, unexpected nature.

Perhaps it will soon be reported that the sun may rise tomorrow.

Fred Niemann, La Cañada Flintridge

Follow the Opinion section on Twitter @latimesopinion and Facebook