Photo

The more Donald Trump presses his supposed effort to appeal to black voters, the more bizarre it gets.

Just this week, the Republican nominee for president said the answer to inner-city violence was to revive New York’s stop-and-frisk program, abandoned after federal courts ruled that the results were racist.

He suggested that his decision to recant his insidious “birther” claims against President Obama was an insincere attempt to change the subject. He declared that his “movement” already embraces “everybody.” And one of his county campaign chairs announced that there was no racism before Obama was elected.

Not convinced that this is going to make black Americans vote for Trump?

That’s probably because Trump isn’t actually speaking to minority voters. He is offering excuses for white Americans who might otherwise hesitate to support a racist candidate.

In 1980, as the political journalist Adam Clymer pointed out, Ronald Reagan pivoted from denouncing “welfare queens” to appearing before the National Urban League. He also persuaded a couple of prominent black ministers to endorse him.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

But African-Americans were not fooled. Reagan got little support from black voters, and Republican candidates who followed him did as badly or worse. Trump’s support among African-Americans is in the single digits. At his convention in Cleveland, there were 18 African-American delegates, the smallest share in more than a century.

Unlike Reagan, Trump skipped the Urban League meeting in August, but he did appear at a “town hall” meeting on Wednesday devoted to “core issues and concerns surrounding African-Americans,” where Sean Hannity of Fox News obligingly served up softball questions.

Not even Hannity, who seems to have joined the Trump campaign full time, could make Trump sound credible on race. At one point, he asked Trump how, specifically, his economic policies would help African-Americans. Trump replied:

We need jobs. Desperately need jobs. Now, obviously we need the schools, we need the education, we need all sorts of things, and especially the inner cities. The inner cities are — can you say never? But certainly one of the worst stages ever in the history of the inner city. It’s so unsafe, where you walk down the street and you get shot, or your child gets shot. So we’re going to really fix the inner cities, we’re going to spend a lot of time.

Trump then blamed Democratic mayors and Obama for a rising crime rate that made Chicago “worse than Afghanistan.” (It will shock you to learn that Chicago is a lot less dangerous than Afghanistan.)

The answer? Stop-and-frisk. Trump said former New York Mayor Rudy Giuliani did a “great job” by giving the police the authority to stop people at random on the streets and search them for weapons.

The crime rate in New York dropped in the ’90s, as it did around the country, but not because of stop-and-frisk. Of nearly 4.5 million stops conducted under the policy, only 6 percent resulted in arrests and 6 percent in summonses. In about 83 percent of cases, the person stopped was black or Hispanic.

The trial judge declared stop-and-frisk unconstitutional, and it was ultimately ended. Trump thinks that’s a shame.

So far, there’s no sign that his pitch is resonating with actual black voters. But the real message is getting through to his supporters, like Kathy Miller, chairman of the Trump campaign in Mahoning County, Ohio, which includes the rust-belt city of Youngstown.

“I don’t think there was any racism until Obama got elected,” Miller told a reporter from The Guardian.

Sign Up for the Opinion Today Newsletter Every weekday, get thought-provoking commentary from Op-Ed columnists, the Times editorial board and contributing writers from around the world. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

“Now, with the people with the guns, and shooting up neighborhoods, and not being responsible citizens, that’s a big change, and I think that’s the philosophy that Obama has perpetuated on America,” Miller said. “I think that’s all his responsibility.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

On Earth, people know that racism has poisoned America since it was founded. All that changed when Obama was elected in 2008 was that some bigots began to speak more openly.

Trump has given them permission to shout their hatred from the rooftops. That’s the truth behind his campaign, and no phony town-hall meeting staged by Fox News is going to change it.