To the editor: Christopher Hawthorne appears out of touch with reality on what to do with the 2 Freeway spur in Echo Park. ("Transforming the end of the 2 Freeway could be the beginning of a new L.A.," Dec. 31)

A modest program to reconfigure the 2 Freeway terminus, after years of community meetings, went nowhere. What was left of the $12 million set aside for projects in the area went toward a sound wall and some exterior decorating at Glendale Boulevard for a stunted “gateway statement” landscaping spot.

Removing the commuter corridor that includes 2nd Street, Glendale Boulevard and the 2 Freeway terminus from service would be a disaster. I doubt many locals here would support it.

We already have an expensive architect's playground in this area for Frank Gehry et al down in Elysian Valley. Too bad a fraction of the money that will be spent on that can't be spared to nourish nearby Elysian Park — which is grander than anything Hawthorne is proposing and sorely in need of some work.

Tim Clark, Los Angeles

..

To the editor: Hawthorne's idea of closing the last stretch of the 2 Freeway leading into downtown is a bad one.

Commuters who use that freeway don't just come from Glendale. The nature of some people's work requires them to use a car. Most of the time during rush hour, I use the 210 Freeway from Northridge to the 2; I'm sure thousands of drivers use that route traveling from Canyon Country and the Antelope Valley as well.

The city lost its opportunity to create a park when the Dodgers were up for sale. Chavez Ravine is the ideal location for the park overlooking the city.

Esrom Jayasinghe, Northridge

..

To the editor: My wife and I had the opportunity to walk on the High Line in New York City when we were staying in the Chelsea area right next to the entrance of the park. We marveled at how wonderful the views were while walking high above the street on the elevated rail line.

What a wonderful idea this was for unused railroad track, and we wish there was something like this in Los Angeles.

As someone who's seen the possibilities of what can be done with old transportation corridors, I think Hawthorne's idea for the 2 spur would be a wonderful use of open space.

Ed Sinderman, Laguna Woods

Follow the Opinion section on Twitter @latimesopinion and Facebook