To the editor: It is encouraging that Chief Charlie Beck is invoking an evolution in training to incorporate preservation of life principles for the Los Angeles Police Department. ("Police Commission approves changes emphasizing de-escalation before deadly force by LAPD," March 15)

Still, police union President Craig Lally's statement that de-escalation can be achieved by running away is not only sarcastic, but also an insult to anyone who puts thought and care into future solutions. In fact, it is often the police themselves who escalate a situation, as we saw with some peaceful Occupy protests.

For the public, running away does not necessarily remove us from harm's way. Ask anyone who's been shot in the back by police.

If training officers in preservation of life needs to be done, let's do it. On the other hand, maybe the LAPD could start by hiring human beings, because human beings do not need this kind of training. Preservation of life is just an instinct in balanced members of our species.

Get some psychiatrists and vet cadets before they get to the streets. But if the department really must train them to do what should come naturally, then that would be, at best, second best.

Scott Rubel, Los Angeles

..

To the editor: The article states, “By including specific language about so-called de-escalation strategies in department policy, the police chief and commissioners would have to consider whether officers have tried to avoid using deadly force.”

I think de-escalation strategies could be a fine idea, but the strategies are being applied only to the police. The public needs to be reminded that it also has de-escalation responsibilities in a confrontation — for example. do exactly what the police officer says, drop your weapon, raise your hands, don't make any sudden moves, don't reach into your pocket, don't make a grab for the officer's gun, don't be a threat of any kind and don't provoke the officer.

If people followed common-sense rules like those, I think hardly anybody would get shot.

Thomas Mann, Pasadena

Follow the Opinion section on Twitter @latimesopinion and Facebook