To the editor: After hearing multiple news reports about all the Republican leaders who are signing on to presumptive presidential nominee Donald Trump’s campaign, despite the fact that many have expressed disapproval of his changing policies and overall ignorance regarding world affairs, your article on Silicon Valley lining up against him was a breath of fresh air. ("Donald Trump has done the unthinkable: Unite Silicon Valley," May 24)

It was heartening to read that a large number of Silicon Valley workers and entrepreneurs find Trump ill tempered and unfit to be president.

We need to balance GOP support with a full fledged campaign against everything he stands for. He is a dangerous man, and I hope the Silicon Valley leaders do all they can to help prevent him from becoming president.

Ina Mozer, La Mesa

..

To the editor: Wasn’t it only four years ago that Republican candidates were campaigning against President Obama on the grounds that businesses needed stability to be able to plan and hire?

Do the Republicans think Trump, who changes his public statements on a wide variety of issues, will provide that?

Daniel Fink, Beverly Hills

..

To the editor: I find it simultaneously hilarious and unsettling to see your non-endorsement of Trump appear in the same issue that featured an above-the-fold, front-page story about him. ("Vote for anyone but Trump in the California primary," editorial, May 19)

Your editorial calls Trump’s candidacy “disturbing,” “a shame” and “poisonous.” Yet the amount of free coverage afforded this unfit presidential contender is astounding. Has there been any introspection on the part of the media to realize how this has come to pass?

Why not present a regular digest or, better yet, in-depth analysis of all of the candidates’ positions instead of a constant barrage of Trump campaign play-by-play? This would result in a three-pronged civic improvement over what we have endured the past several months. It would better inform; it would present real comparisons to a voting public now swayed primarily by celebrity-like coverage; and it would give fair treatment to all sides.

Information, analysis, fairness — what a journalistic concept!

Sharon Graham, Huntington Beach

Follow the Opinion section on Twitter @latimesopinion and Facebook