To the editor: Reading Steve Lopez’s column about his expletive-laced phone conversation with California Coastal Commission member Martha McClure, I thought of the scene in “All the President’s Men” where Atty. Gen. John Mitchell chewed out reporter Carl Bernstein on the phone and promised he would destroy them for their absurd and groundless implication that the Richard Nixon White House might be involved in Watergate. ("Cover your ears: Coastal Commissioner Martha McClure's on the phone," May 14)

Commissioner McClure may think Steve Lopez is “out of [his] mind if [he] was suggesting that a $500 donation to her could influence a vote,” but she misses the point.

That campaign contribution came from the business partner of the owner of the biggest lobby shop in the coastal development business. After taking it, McClure, instead of recusing herself, proceeded to vote on projects represented by that lobbyist before the Coastal Commission. That’s a potential violation of the law.

Go get ‘em, Mr. Lopez.

Catherine Ridder, Altadena

..

To the editor: While I appreciate The Times’ coverage of the Coastal Commission and Steve Lopez’s “opiniontainment” pieces, I urge all readers to attend a commission meeting and come to their own conclusions about its conduct. Certainly, any such conclusions will differ greatly from the negative view presented by Lopez and The Times.

Commissioners work diligently to come to the correct conclusion on complex, technical matters. They are buried with reams of information from staff, applicants and other stakeholders and must determine the proper solution in a relatively short period of time. Commissioners must also rely on imperfect, subjective information from their own staff.

The more diligent commissioners receive pre-hearing information from applicants and others to consider in their decision-making. Commissioners receiving information from applicants before formal hearings is a critical part of the process.

Commissioners are appointed to make tough judgment calls on incredibly complex matters involving our precious coast. They deserve better than the recent hatchet job by The Times.

Ken Ehrlich, Pacific Palisades

The writer is an attorney who has represented clients with matters before the Coastal Commission.

Follow the Opinion section on Twitter @latimesopinion and Facebook