To the editor: I’ve got to hand it to Donald Trump. With his latest proposal to do “extreme vetting” of people wishing to migrate to America, he’s come up with something that might really protect us.

( “Trump seeks ‘extreme’ test for migrants,” Aug. 16)

In fact, I’ll bet that he could make us even safer if he were to extend extreme vetting to prospective gun purchasers; why, he could even apply it retroactively to gun owners.

Now, if we could only implement extreme vetting of presidential candidates....

David Michels, Encino

::

To the editor: Trump wants to admit only those who hold “American values.”

Are those white middle-class American values or poor black values? Whose American values?

Paula Parr, Santa Clarita

::

To the editor: As your article said: “To Trump, that means ensuring anyone entering the country shares American values.”

And what exactly is wrong with that?

This is real simple: Don’t come to this country if you don’t share American values.

Jo-Anne Collins, Fountain Valley

::

To the editor: “Give me your tired, your poor, your extremely vetted, yearning to breathe free....”

L. John Ernst, Chatsworth

::

To the editor: Trump says he wants to fight an ideology that promotes oppression of women and gays. Is he not aware of the fact that the political party he represents promotes oppression of women and gays?

He wants to deny entry to the country to people who espouse this ideology. Does that mean he wants to deport Republicans who espouse it?

Bob Lentz, Sylmar

::

To the editor: When saying he wouldn’t allow in or would deport those “who believe that sharia law should supplant American law” and those “who do not believe in our Constitution, or who support bigotry and hatred,” he was talking about his supporters and far-right evangelicals, right?

Barry Davis, Agoura Hills

::

To the editor: In a speech on his immigration policy, Trump said that those “who support bigotry and hatred will not be admitted.” Hmmm, does that mean he and all of his followers will leave the country? If so, I suspect it would raise the average IQ of the country considerably.

As an added benefit, the national debt could be reduced by selling hats emblazoned with “Make America SMART Again.” Of course, the hats would be made right here in the good old U.S. of A. as opposed to China.

Patricia Brown, Redondo Beach

::

To the editor: Your story did not mention 80% of Trump’s speech in favor of repeating past “gaffes,” and ignores how Hillary Clinton and the president have handled things to date.

“Extreme” vetting of immigrants coming to the United States is both legal and necessary.

The United States has always excluded those who do not believe in our values, e.g. anarchists, communists, etc. Advocates of sharia law deserve no less.

Steven Vien, San Pedro

::

To the editor: The article about Trump’s call for “extreme vetting” of migrants was bewildering. For some, it will be the menace of McCarthyism of the past. For others, the future foundation of fascism.

Either way, Trump has become terribly tedious.

Perhaps, the salient words of Oscar Wilde are apropos: “It is absurd to divide people into good or bad. People are either charming or tedious.”

It is conceivable, though, that Trump is also becoming bad for America.

Tom Kaminski, Redondo Beach

::

To the editor: Extreme vetting was on national display during the GOP primary — resulting in Trump, a reality show producer, the last one standing.

Trust me, my friends, that is why the really beautiful, wonderful, fantastic extreme vetting works, a beautiful thing, really, folks have told me.

Bob Ginn, Arcadia

Follow the Opinion section on Twitter @latimesopinion and Facebook