To the editor: I have no truck with conspiracy theories, yet I firmly believe that, given a choice between Republican Donald Trump and Democrat Hillary Clinton, Vladimir Putin would choose Trump for president. (“Trump's opposition research firm: Russia's intelligence agencies,” Opinion, July 25)

This is not because Trump would be a good president — quite the opposite.

Russian President Putin has done his best to resurrect the ghost of Soviet superpower. Would he prefer his opponent in this process to be a woman with experience, knowledge of the structure of the post-World War II balance of power and an even temperament, or an experience-free know-nothing? Putin would love nothing better than for us to elect a leader who is a foreign-policy toddler.

Whether Putin is trying to influence this election or not, his choice is clear. That should give pause to those of us who don’t think Putin’s presidency in Russia is a good thing.

Branden Frankel, Encino

..

To the editor: The Times’ editorial board calmly cautions readers not to hastily link Trump to Russia. (“Democrats see a silver lining in an email release,” editorial, July 26)

Good suggestion, but it’s too late: In an op-ed article on the same day, Max Boot did exactly that.

How many Russian links do we need to prove a connection? Two leaders in the Trump campaign, manager Paul Manafort and foreign policy advisor Lt. Gen. Michael Flynn, have Putin links so strong they seem beyond dispute. And, if Boot is right, American banks now refuse to lend to Trump, who instead has received backing from Russian investors.

As a reader who devours everything on your editorial pages, I respectfully offer a suggestion: The Times’ editorial board should read the paper’s own op-ed page.

Maralys Wills, Santa Ana

..

To the editor: The GOP continues to turn a blind eye to Trump’s expressed admiration of the malevolent Russian leader.

If Clinton had received loans from Russian investors and surrounded herself with political advisors who have questionable ties to Russian politicians, as Trump has, many Republicans would probably accuse her of treason. Instead, they ignore Trump’s lack of good judgment even though it could threaten the well-being of our country.

Phyllis Landis, Oceanside

Follow the Opinion section on Twitter @latimesopinion and Facebook