To the editor: You correctly identify the need to have our state’s emergency funds preserved for catastrophic disasters. It is inappropriate to drain emergency funds for social programs. (“Homelessness is an emergency — but not like an earthquake,” editorial, Aug. 19)

However, the homelessness problem requires more than just funding.

The homeless population is divided into four different groups: drug addicts, alcoholics, the mentally ill and the economically deprived. Of those four, only the economically deprived will benefit from housing and job training to become productive citizens.

State lawmakers must give cities and counties a pathway to provide comprehensive services, including mandated treatment, to effectively address the issue. Mentally ill people require more than the 72 hours of assessment and treatment as currently allowed under California involuntary hold laws.

Until we effectively address the primary causes of homelessness, siphoning money away from emergency funds reserved for disasters for mass housing projects is irresponsible and will do little to solve the problem.

Michael D. Antonovich, Los Angeles

The writer is a Los Angeles County supervisor.

..

To the editor: The state of California has been notoriously weak in homeless policy. Establishing a state of emergency and convening leadership would be a critical first step in reversing a decades-long trend of neglect that has had disastrous consequences in cities and rural areas throughout California.

Yet disappointingly, The Times opposes that measure. Although three-page Senate Resolution 84 does not even mention the use of reserve funds, that is where The Times focuses its misplaced objection.

The cause of homelessness can be summed up by the collection of excuses policymakers have been using for years to not do enough, be it in land use or funding for services and housing. This proposal is long overdue, and it deserves widespread support.

Natalie Profant Komuro, Glendale

The writer is executive director of the homeless services agency Ascencia.

..

To the editor: I was disheartened to read your editorial.

Just because homelessness is not caused by a force of nature does not make it any less serious or any less hurtful for the people directly affected. And because it happens on local streets, under local underpasses and in local parks does not make it any more or less a city or county problem than a state problem.

The city and county of Los Angeles are now stepping up their efforts to solve homelessness and the state should do likewise by declaring a state of emergency, like Hawaii has done. Now.

Ruth Schwartz, Los Angeles

The writer is executive director of Shelter Partnership Inc.

Follow the Opinion section on Twitter @latimesopinion and Facebook