To the editor: I wholeheartedly agree with Michael Krikorian that there is a horrible lack of outrage about Gerrik Thomas' killing in South Los Angeles. Where are the protests? Do black lives matter only when those lives are taken by people who are not black? ("Just another South L.A. killing?," Opinion, Feb. 4)

The problem, as I see it, is that the media do not find this sort of homicide newsworthy. Why not? Newspapers like The Times and others ought to devote the effort and space to make the killing of black people front-page news, just as when the police or a white person senselessly kills a black person.

Black lives do matter, and each black person who is killed like Thomas was deserves the outrage of the community. The media have the responsibility to inform the wider community of such horrific incidents as that of Thomas' murder so that more of us can join with his family to mourn and to acknowledge that all black lives matter. Don't bury these stories.

Catherine Spencer, San Bernardino

..

To the editor: Krikorian's article about Thomas' senseless killing and the lack of any kind of national or even local outcry over his death raised the obvious question: Why?

Why was there no statement from President Obama regarding how Gerrik could've been his own son? Where was Jesse Jackson or Al Sharpton? Why were there no demonstrations from Black Lives Matter?

The answer is very simple: The death of Thomas simply does not fit their agenda and what they're trying to sell. In communities like South L.A., blacks have been killing other blacks in staggering numbers for years. If anything should be worthy of protest, it's the violent death of young men like Thomas and his many fellow victims.

The fact that these killings are met with mostly silence is an abomination.

Charles Reilly, Manhattan Beach

..

To the editor: The Times has been delivered to wherever I have lived in L.A. for more than 50 years. I am a strong advocate of free speech, but sometimes your opinion pieces are a bit too jumbled. Not on Feb. 4.

I was so moved by the precise words used to describe the young man who was shot in the daytime by someone he didn't even know. What are we? The wild west? Where is the outpouring of support for these young men?

I agree with Krikorian that there is not enough outrage, and I am so disappointed by those in government and law enforcement who sat on their hands.

L.D. Root, Los Angeles

..

To the editor: I totally agree with Krikorian.

Black Lives Matter and every other black organization should be marching in the street protesting these killing by gang members over stupid stuff, and not only when law enforcement is doing the killing. Where is the outrage over gangs killing our kids?

Charles P. Martin, Los Angeles

Follow the Opinion section on Twitter @latimesopinion and Facebook