To the editor: The term “sports hero” is widely used but rarely appropriate. The abilities to throw, run and jump may be admirable, but do those qualities truly display heroism? (“Muhammad Ali dies at 74; boxing champion became worldwide celebrity,” June 3)

Muhammad Ali was different. He distinguished himself from other athletes by transcending the sport of boxing and standing for something. And he suffered greatly for taking his stand.

Had he accepted military induction for a war he adamantly felt was immoral, he certainly would have been insulated from danger. But he stood on principle and sacrificed a fighter’s prime years as he was stripped of his title and vilified. But he never backed down.

I am a baby boomer who likes to think I too have a conscience, if not the courage of Ali, and we too feel we have passed, in part, with our hero. Ali will stay in our hearts, invincible and uncompromising, and inspiring us to face our own trials.

Ron Terranova, Huntington Beach

..

To the editor: Ali has received praise and acclaim, even the highest award given to a civilian by the president.

Do not let us forget the soldier who was drafted to take Ali’s place when the boxing champion refused to serve his country. The government did not simply decide to get along without Ali; it had to find someone else to take his responsibility.

Perhaps that replacement went to Vietnam. Perhaps he was wounded or even gave his life for his country. That soldier is the one I want to recognize. He’s the one to whom I want to give acclaim. It’s him I want to praise.

Whoever you are, thank you for your service.

Gil Velasquez, West Covina

..

To the editor: In almost none of the stories that have appeared since Ali’s death have I seen any connection between his Parkinson’s disease and his boxing career. Why is that?

We talk freely about the effect of head injuries on football players and our fighting forces. Boxing, which subjected Ali to blows to his head throughout his long career, has been exempt. For the sake of those now engaged in the “sweet science,” it should never be that way again.

Joan Walston, Santa Monica

..

To the editor: It was sometime in the 1970s. I was at LAX starting on a business trip. While waiting for my flight to board, I found an empty waiting room for which no flight was scheduled and read a book. The gate opened and about 10 men emerged and started walking toward me.

Ali was in the middle of this procession. He was even better looking than his photos.

I decided to stand while they passed and called out, “The Man!” Ali stopped, waded through the crowd of men with him and held out his hand. We shook hands without either saying another word, but we were both smiling. Then he went on his way.

It was just a brief encounter, and though not as important as his championships and his opposition to the Vietnam War, his attention to a single fan in an empty room says a lot about his character.

John R. Shiban, Westlake Village

..

To the editor: I was standing outside the Capitol in Washington with my students when a limousine pulled up and out climbed Ali.

There was a gasp of recognition among the students, and I said, “Mr. Ali, these are students from California who are big fans of yours.” His face lit up and he began to walk haltingly toward us. Immediately, two bodyguards grabbed him and pulled him away from us and into the building where he was to testify before a Senate committee about Parkinson’s disease.

Fortunately some of the kids got good photos, which I know they’ll always treasure, and I will never forget the look on his face, which showed such love for his fans.

Tom Bauer, Morro Bay

Follow the Opinion section on Twitter @latimesopinion and Facebook