To the editor: The loutish behavior of some supporters of Sen. Bernie Sanders (I-Vt.) with access to the phone numbers of superdelegates committed to Hillary Clinton suggests that the apple doesn't fall far from the tree. ("Sanders' supporters are lashing out, but here's how they might be hurting his campaign," April 15)

Having viewed all nine Democratic debates of the campaign, I have watched as Sanders has transformed from a thoughtful, even-tempered candidate with a coherent message to an increasingly strident, petulant and self-righteous crank.

Since it appears highly unlikely that Sanders can overcome Clinton's substantial lead to win the Democratic nomination, I hope that he and his enthusiastic backers will show Clinton the same magnanimity in 2016 that she showed Barack Obama in 2008.

Harold N. Bass, Porter Ranch

..

To the editor: I'm not voting for Donald Trump, but he has a point. Sanders has the same point: Our election system is in desperate need of an overhaul.

True democracy is one person, one vote. The political parties and their delegates are middlemen that interfere with true democracy. We don't know who the delegates are, and we certainly don't go to the ballot box thinking that we are voting for a delegate.

Get rid of delegates. Count the votes.

Regarding voting, it should be done online. If we can bank and file tax returns online, we should be able to vote online securely.

Andy Malone, San Clemente

..

To the editor: Paul Song, whose sister-in-law Laura Ling was released from North Korea as a result of Bill Clinton's intervention, demonstrated that he is ungrateful by calling Hillary Clinton a “corporate Democratic whore.”

More important, it is very disturbing that Sanders supporters are trying to create a rift in the Democratic Party right when the Republicans are in such disarray that there is a clear path to victory in November. They are doing a disservice to the country by making a Republican victory possible.

Byron Gross, Beverly Hills

..

To the editor: As an old lefty woman who supports Sanders, I am very concerned about the “Bernie bros” and others who attack Clinton in a rude, name-calling fashion. I strongly feel that Sanders must publicly denounce all such behavior on his behalf.

Leave the insults to Trump.

Julie May, Los Angeles

Follow the Opinion section on Twitter @latimesopinion and Facebook.

MORE READERS REACT

UC Davis' wasteful attempt at crisis PR on the Internet

'Independent' but really a member of a right-wing party? Blame yourself

'Bathroom panic' in North Carolina: What about the rights of transgender people?