To the editor: After reading the opinion piece, I couldn’t disagree more. (“Losing another piece of L.A.’s soul,” Opinion, Aug. 12)

I was so impressed with what I saw at the newly renovated Petersen Automotive Museum that I took another friend days later, and had just as much fun.

I had been to the old format museum on several occasions, and enjoyed it thoroughly — but since I’ve lived in Southern California my whole life, it was more of a museum about the car culture that I already knew.

The new museum introduced me to an array of one-of-a- kind cars that I’ve only seen in pictures. To be able to actually stand before a magnificent Bugatti or Delahaye, is an emotional experience.

Martin Colver, Costa Mesa

..

To the editor: David Ulin’s comments about the Petersen Automotive Museum echo the sentiments I’ve heard from nearly all my car buddies who have been around the Los Angeles car environment much longer than me.

But this isn’t just an issue of old-timers disliking change; rather, we should ask how well does the Petersen meet its own mission statement: “To explore and present the history of the automobile and its impact on American life and culture using Los Angeles as a prime example.”

Would a visitor to the Petersen know that almost all the major car manufacturers had factories in Los Angeles? What would they learn about drive-ins, woodies, dune buggies, the fabrication shops that built so many of the cars that raced at Indy in the ’50s? Or the hot-rod shops that grew to supply aftermarket performance parts worldwide? Or the coach builders who supplied elegant cars to Hollywood stars in the ’30s? It was all in the Petersen, version 1.0.

Version 2.0 is stylish and classy, but it could be moved to Las Vegas without changing any of the interior or exhibits.

The exterior? It fits Las Vegas even better.

Bob Schmitt, Burbank

..

To the editor: I’m a charter docent at the Petersen Automotive Museum, 21 years and counting.

When renovations began, we old-timers mourned the demise of the streetscape — but the new building is spectacular. I’ve visited many auto museums around the country; most are barn-like with rows of cars on display — no fun, really.

The Petersen collection now is diverse, elegant and engaging. Docents happily interact with guests and hopefully teach them something.

The museum has much to offer the whole family. Pixar is here. Art Center College has a classroom. Forza Motorsport Racing Experience is a virtual thrill.

Yes, we’ve traveled into the 21st century and it’s fun being here.

Sara Frank, Santa Monica

..

To the editor: I strongly disagree with the author’s premise. Although some L.A. nostalgia is lost (the Helms Bakery truck, the Atlantic Richfield gas pump, etc.), the new museum is nothing short of jaw-dropping.

The silver room and the stunning “big cars” of the first floor more than make up for whatever might be off the floors now. I spent a long afternoon at the Petersen, and that was even with skipping the “extra” of visiting the vault.

Fred Glasser, Orange

..

To the editor: It was the mention of Kiddieland that got to me. As a child, I celebrated a few birthdays there, then rode the “horses” next door.

I also remember when the Petersen was, in another lifetime, Seibu, the U.S. branch of the Japanese department store chain.

Later, I worked across the street at May Co., now another bit of LACMA.

I think I see a trend developing.

Jeff Radin, Venice

Follow the Opinion section on Twitter @latimesopinion and Facebook