To the editor: I can only assume that the AIDS Healthcare Foundation was formed for many reasons, such as conducting medical research, assisting those with AIDS and other worthy causes. This obviously requires a clear vision as to how the donations, grants or any other funds realized by associated businesses will be spent toward the goals of the foundation. ("L.A. City Council OKs 2 controversial high-rises in Hollywood," March 22)

I'm not sure that spending any of these funds, however earned, on highly expensive and typically exhaustive legal fees for a cause wholly unassociated with the foundation's charter was ever part of the plan. For foundation President Michael Weinstein to take umbrage over the approval of the Palladium Residences and use the foundation's funds to fight against approval of the high-rise project smacks of a personal agenda and an ego run amok.

What possible harm could the building of these residences inflict on AIDS patients?

Dennis Kline, Irvine

..

To the editor: Obviously, the members of our Los Angeles City Council are all for more mega-residential tower construction to relieve the housing crisis. Meanwhile, they are also struggling to find the funds to deal with the growing homeless problem.

Here's a suggestion they might like: Apparently, the developers have no problem getting the multi-millions (billions?) of dollars to fund their new high-rise residential buildings. Before construction begins, the developers should be required to build facilities to provide for a specified number of homeless people.

How about facilities for at least two homeless persons for each new residential apartment unit? Thus we solve both problems at once. The developers can even put their names on these facilities and take full credit.

George Epstein, Los Angeles

..

To the editor: So, the executive director of the nonprofit AIDS Healthcare Foundation commits resources, likely donated, from his 21st floor headquarters in a high-rise office building to fight the proposed towers next door. Maybe he should reconsider his organization's mission and move to a less expensive lower floor.

Cary Adams, North Hollywood

Follow the Opinion section on Twitter @latimesopinion and Facebook