To the editor: I read, with more than a little amusement, The Times' coverage and letters comparing millennials' “youthful” traits (e.g. sense of entitlement) with baby boomers' “Luddism.” (“Suit targets surfer gang,” March 30, and “Boomers bite back,” Letters, March 30)

The same day, I also read your article about legal action being taken against an alleged gang of juvenile middle-agers called the Lunada Bay Boys over alleged semi-thug-like tactics to keep non-local surfers away from “their” beach.

Conclusion: A warped sense of entitlement isn't limited to any one generation.

Oh, and although as a “war baby” — born in 1944 — culturally, I'm very much a flower-power boomer who eventually does adapt to new technology.

Alan Rosenstein, Santa Monica

::

To the editor: As a Palos Verdes peninsula resident for more than 35 years, I resent spending my tax dollars fighting a gang injunction against local surfing residents, many of whom are professionals and property owners.

I have known and worked for years with several of them.

Concurrently, this past year we have had an unusually high number of property and home invasion crimes. We want and need our police spending their time protecting and serving us rather than being in court.

Michael L. Friedman, Rancho Palos Verdes

::

To the editor: Lunada Bay surfers are not a gang.

Some surf spots have the geography to handle a big crowd, such as Trestles or Malibu. Lunada Bay does not. The take-off spot is tight and therefore the crowd is tight.

I grew up in Palos Verdes surfing Lunada in the 1970s. The last winter that I caught every swell was 1981. After that work took over, and over the years, I recognized fewer and fewer people. When I surf there now, I know I'm not going to get a lot of waves and I am going to get heckled by the guys who don't know me.

Lunada Bay is a highly competitive spot. The guys who do get waves are dedicated watermen who have spent their lives establishing themselves there.

Phil Traeger, San Pedro

::

To the editor: I'd like to say something to the boomers and millennials from a greatest generation perspective:

There's always been a generation gap — if you're familiar with the term.

Ray Sherman, Duarte

Follow the Opinion section on Twitter @latimesopinion and Facebook