To the editor: Isn’t it at least as important to call Donald Trump out for completely misrepresenting Hillary Clinton’s position on gun ownership?

She does not advocate the repeal of the 2nd Amendment.

This significant factual clarification was a parenthetical aside in the middle of yet another exhaustive front-page story focusing on the intentionally provocative “off-message” comments of the Republican standard-bearer.

As you wrote: “Her proposals actually are limited to expanding background checks and controls on certain weapons.”

(“Trouble for Trump,” Aug. 7, “Off message,” Aug. 10 and “Loaded language on guns,” Editorial, Aug. 10)

This kind of coverage does a disservice to Clinton, to supporters of reasonable gun control legislation and to voters seeking a meaningful discussion of the actual policy differences between the candidates.

Leslie Franz, La Mesa

..

To the editor: Thank goodness there is a 1st Amendment, so GOP presidential nominee Trump can spout off about “ 2nd Amendment people.”

Personally, I’m tired of The Donald making wild campaign accusations that require rounds of clarification.

The man is running for president of the United States. He should say what he means and own what he says.

Words matter Mr. Trump, no matter when or where you say them.

Denny Freidenrich, Laguna Beach

..

To the editor: Trump doesn’t frighten me.

What frightens me is that tens of millions of my fellow citizens support for president a racist, sexist Islamophobe with a massive ego but no regard for truth, fairness or common decency.

Is America great? We’ll know in November.

Jim Anderson, Santa Clarita

..

To the editor: The obvious interpretation of all of Trump’s outrageous, insulting and juvenile behavior is easy to sum up.

He never really wanted to move to the White House, but loves a challenge.

If he was obnoxious and irresponsible enough to get everyone’s attention, he could get the tremendous coverage that he craves and go back to the Trump House.

Now he faces the debates, where he will get hammered by Clinton so he needs an excuse to cry foul before he has to step onto the stage.

He is silently screaming “Help! Get me out of this!” And so are we.

Bring it on, Hillary.

Shirley McKernan, Los Angeles

..

To the editor: My wife and I are members of the Reagan Library.

We were there recently with friends and at the end of our visits, we always take a moment at the Reagan Memorial Site.

I was standing there wondering: “What would President Reagan think of this Republican, Donald Trump, and his comments on Ukraine and their citizens’ treatment by Russia?”

Just then, I think I heard a rumble like someone was turning over in his grave.

I am a registered Republican voting for Hillary Clinton.

This man is not fit for office. If this is the best the Republicans have, I’ll be a Democrat by the next election.

Bill Osburn, La Cañada

..

To the editor: Never have I burned out so quickly in a presidential campaign as this year.

I can’t stomach another word about emails and servers, walls, bigotry, 20-year-old work visas or Iranian “ransoms.”

It’s all incessant noise that deafens one of the most critical factors in the campaign: Trump’s tax returns.

As a self-proclaimed billionaire running on his business acumen, no single piece of information could be more revealing. Releasing his tax returns should be the clarion call from all voters and especially the media.

Trump urged the release of Mitt Romney’s returns in 2012. His refusal to release his own now is the definition of hypocrisy.

The American electorate deserves to know if Trump is the candidate he proclaims to be. Show us the returns.

Cy Bolton, Rancho Cucamonga

..

To the editor: I don’t know about his other attributes, but if elected Trump would easily become the greatest visionary president ever. Here’s the proof:

He saw Vladimir Putin when they were both on “60 Minutes,” even though the segments were taped in different locations.

He saw $400 million being traded for hostages, and he continued to do so for two days after his staff told him no one else had seen this.

He saw a letter from the NFL and cited it in support of his claim that the presidential debate schedule was rigged against him, notwithstanding that the NFL says no such letter was written.

With examples like these, who wouldn’t believe his visions of a great wall paid for by Mexico, of rewriting trade agreements, and bringing back to America jobs that are done so economically elsewhere that he himself has multiple overseas manufacturing interests.

As he so often says, “trust me.”

Rick Dunn, San Diego

..

To the editor: I have been a Trump supporter since he entered the campaign and have even encouraged others to join me.

His nomination speech was uplifting. Since then, things have worsened.

It was my hope that he might help to make other nations respect our country again, but he has continued the childish tweeting and railing against anyone and anything without thinking.

His emphasis should be on Hillary Clinton, rather than trying to get revenge if he doesn’t like what he hears or reads.

If Trump doesn’t begin taking advice and speaking and acting presidential, I will not vote for him, and neither will those who have listened to me.

Arline George, Reseda

..

To the editor: To Trump and his followers I say yes, the system is “rigged.”

And thank God it is.

It includes a 1st Amendment. It is this freedom that is currently exposing the dark underbelly of the Trump campaign.

He has tried to “re-rig” the system by banning news outlets from his rallies.

And yet, even widely established conservative luminaries denounce him.

The “rigged” system, now awakening from a temporary trance, is zooming in on his shrouded innuendos, gross generalizations, statements unfounded by facts and frightening distortions.