To the editor: When Pat Haden was appointed athletic director at USC in 2010, I breathed a sigh of relief. I went to UCLA in the 1970s, and even I was caught up in the “golden boy” status that Haden had. Quarterback for USC and the Los Angeles Rams, a succesful attorney and businessman, and a Rhodes scholar — was there anything he hadn’t been stellar at? (“L.A. education foundation became a lucrative source of income for USC's Pat Haden and his relatives,” June 18)

Haden’s compensation from USC alone hovers around $2 million annually; why was there any need for him to skim $2.4 million in fees for himself and family members over 17 years while serving as chairman of the George Henry Mayr Foundation, which awards scholarships to needy students? I serve on a nonprofit board, and my colleagues and I earn no pay, just the satisfaction of helping others.

I hope Haden can make a comeback, do the right thing and reclaim his stature.

Susan Fredericks, Calabasas

..

To the editor: I received a scholarship in 1956 from the George Henry Mayr Foundation that allowed me to go to Stanford University. I have never forgotten Mayr and his generosity, which made such a difference in my life. I imagine that every recipient feels the same way.

Perhaps the foundation should be staffed by former holders of its scholarships. If Haden had received a scholarship from the foundation, I’ll bet he would have been more cautious in his handling of its funds.

Carol Mitchell, Marina del Rey

..

To the editor: Do members of the Haden family know how many people didn’t get much-needed scholarships because of their greed?

I know many people who serve on boards, and they all take a minimum stipend for their time or nothing at all. I don’t care if their payments were approved. That in itself is a terrible thing.

They should have done the right thing and said, “No, give it to the kids.”

Steve Shaevel, Woodland Hills

Follow the Opinion section on Twitter @latimesopinion and Facebook

MORE FROM OPINION

Is Trumpism its own religion?

Before you move to Canada...

L.A. needs a great public transit system. Is a permanent sales tax the best way to do it?