Melania Trump’s plagiarism controversy had a good run on cable news and in the Twittersphere, but the 2016 Republican National Convention seems to be quick to hit the reset button to provide a fresh 24-hour brouhaha. The newest one came Wednesday night when Texas Sen. Ted Cruz, Donald Trump’s toughest competition in the Republican primaries, was given a prime speaking spot on the evening program.

I was lucky enough to have a good seat in the press gallery to observe the wild moments that ensued. The first thing that was obvious to me and most sentient beings in the convention hall was that Cruz had carefully crafted his talk with future plans in mind. This was not just a rehash of his campaign stump speech; it was more like a speech a presidential nominee might give — or, in the case of Cruz, a man who is auditioning to be the nominee next time.

It was a good speech and had passages that no other major convention speaker has touched on — sympathetic references to gays and to black victims in police shootings, as well as approving references to old-time Republicans who helped pass civil rights bills in the 1960s. Arguably, it may have been the most open-hearted, liberal-minded speech to be delivered at this convention, which puts the rest of the Republican pontificators at this gathering somewhere to the right of Cruz, one of the most conservative politicians in America.

Whatever its merits, Cruz’s address went longer than its allotted time. It also failed to do the one thing losing candidates are expected to do if they are allowed a starring role at a political convention: endorse the winner. Cruz told Americans to follow their consciences when they vote in November, but he refrained from saying they should vote for Trump.

As it became obvious no endorsement was in the works, the delegates from New York seated front and center on the convention floor began to boo. Cruz made a quick quip about cantankerous New Yorkers and forged on.

Strangely, about that time, some of the lights in the hall began to flicker and the screen image behind Cruz blinked out. Then came another round of boos from a bigger contingent of delegates. This threw Cruz off his game. He struggled to ignore the noise and stay focused on the audience that mattered — the millions of voters across America watching him on their TVs.

From where I sat, I could read Cruz’s teleprompter and saw that he had come to the end of his speech. His stirring conclusion had fallen flat, though, so he improvised additional lines, casting about for a more dramatic ending. Simultaneously, the room erupted at the sight of Trump taking his seat with his children across the hall from the stage.

At that point, Cruz gave up. He said a quick God-bless-something and made a fast exit. More speakers were to come, including Trump’s son Eric, former-Speaker of the House Newt Gingrich and the vice presidential candidate, Indiana Gov. Mike Pence. But as soon as the show was over, all anyone could talk about was Cruz.

Did Trump know Cruz was not going to give his endorsement? In a tweet shortly after the night’s program ended, Trump said he had read the speech two hours earlier but decided to give Cruz his moment in the spotlight anyway.

Did Trump purposely arrive when he did, knowing it would be a huge distraction and flatten his old foe’s finale? Were the New York delegates primed to start a fuss? Did Cruz carry a written copy of his speech onto the stage because he anticipated there might be some disruption, even a convenient glitch that would cut off the teleprompter?

These are some of the questions that will dominate chatter in the media until the next eruption of the unexpected occurs. Donald Trump promised this convention would be a good show and it certainly is entertaining — kind of like a car wreck by the side of the highway that no one can resist slowing down to see.

David.Horsey@latimes.com

Follow me at @davidhorsey on Twitter

MORE TOP OF THE TICKET

Republicans love their Daddy Trump and despise 'Crooked Hillary'

John Kasich orbits the GOP convention like a renegade moon

Donald Trump and Mike Pence are a mismatched political pair