To the editor: The article "Battle over Scalia's seat feeds perception that Supreme Court is less neutral and more partisan" (Feb. 15) reports that the public's view of the U.S. Supreme Court's political neutrality might suffer in a prolonged fight over a replacement for the late Justice Antonin Scalia. If there were any Democrats who felt the court was neutral after the activist overreach of Bush vs. Gore, they were shown the truth with the 2010 Citizens United case.

Scalia's supposed beliefs in a dead Constitution, against activist jurists and for state's rights were set aside in his own rulings when it was expedient. Speaking about his decisions, Scalia said: “Well, I guess the one that created the most waves of disagreement was Bush vs. Gore. That comes up all the time, and my usual response is, ‘Get over it.'"

Now, President Obama gets to appoint a replacement for Scalia and potentially end decades of conservative domination. I have this to say to conservatives who try to stop him: Get over it.

Charles Mark-Walker, North Hills

..

To the editor: Chief Justice John G. Roberts Jr. warned against the politicization of the Supreme Court. Is he really that naive?

Democrats have been struggling to politicize the court and circumvent the legislative process via judicial fiat ever since Franklin D. Roosevelt tried to pack the court with justices more to his liking in 1937. Roe vs. Wade alone frustrated the will of the voters in 46 states. Need I mention the name Robert Bork?

Democrats politicized the court long ago. They are now simply reaping what they have sown.

Patrick M. Dempsey, Granada Hills

..

To the editor: The headline says that the “high court grows more political.” More than what?

Since Marbury vs. Madison in 1803, the first case to apply “judicial review,” the Supreme Court has been political. If that's too far back for most people, look at FDR or the Earl Warren court.

The only difference is that now, more people are paying attention. Who occupies the White House has an impact on the Supreme Court for more years than a brief presidential term.

Stephany Yablow, North Hollywood

Follow the Opinion section on Twitter @latimesopinion and Facebook