To the editor: No more than six months in prison? Possible probation? Really? And those in positions to fix the Los Angeles County Sheriff's Department permanently are holding meetings to figure out how it got so corrupt? ("Ex-L.A. County Sheriff Lee Baca pleads guilty in jail scandal," Feb. 10)

Could it be that the unwillingness to impose the maximum penalty under the law is what enables such embarrassing and visibly disdainful behavior?

Lee Baca was the image and the leader of the sheriff's department. For him to lie about allowing his deputies to threaten a federal agent who was investigating inmate abuse at L.A. County jails demonstrates knowledge of malice aforethought, and for him to get a tap on the wrist is sickening.

Federal officials should make an example of him as a way to show no one is above the law, not even the head of a law enforcement agency. For him to essentially escape accountability sends the clear message that, indeed, this criminal behavior is and will continue to be tolerated.

Lincoln Gable Riley, Culver City

..

To the editor: In spite of the fact that he will likely serve (inappropriately short) prison time, it is my understanding that Baca will continue to receive almost all of his pension, even while incarcerated.

In a logical society, any government employee (elected or not) should be entirely deprived of his government pension if found to have been committing a crime while working. Officials seem to be convicted regularly, so we are obviously not getting honest government service. Perhaps a consideration of their own financial interest will force these people to reform.

Of course, this would require a change in the law by those who stand to gain from corruption, so we should not hold our breath. However, perhaps one of those dot-com millionaires will divert attention from the environment for a bit (though a worthy subject) and finance an initiative that will eliminate pensions for those who act criminally while supposedly serving the public.

Joel Drum, Van Nuys

..

To the editor: Oh my goodness. Guilty? A sheriff? In reality, abuse by the sheriff's department started way back in East Los Angeles in the 1960s and continued through the 2000s. It took decades finally to print what my family has known all along.

My parents are celebrating at Calvary Cemetery.

Myrna Villegas Tellez, South Pasadena

..

To the editor: I'm disappointed in the editorial hatchet job on Baca. More than any other police officer I ever met in North America, Baca understood community policing and what it meant to be a “peace officer.”

To reduce his legacy to a simple “gotcha” moment is to do a disservice to a man who spent almost 50 years in public service.

Amir Hussain, Los Angeles

Follow the Opinion section on Twitter @latimesopinion and Facebook