To the editor: Yes, Donald Trump continues to win primaries. But the subheadline for the print piece on Trump's victories, which states that the “GOP leader again shows his broad appeal,” is misleading. ("Trump rolls on, winning 3 of 4 states; Cruz takes Idaho," March 8)

Though he may be the front-runner for his party's nomination, Trump hardly has broad appeal among Republican voters. He has not garnered 50% of the vote in any of the primaries or caucuses to date. His best showing was in Massachusetts (hardly a GOP stronghold), where he came close with 49.3%. Elsewhere, his vote totals range from 21.3% to 47.3%; generally, he comes in between 35% and 43%.

Some analysis should be done before declaring that Trump has broad appeal.

Steven J. Barkin, Studio City

..

To to the editor: The GOP establishment is missing Trump's selling point. He is not a con artist, he's a business man.

Trump was fortunate to get a loan and inheritance from his wealthy father, but look at what he has built. He will try different products, ideas and buildings; obviously some will win and some won't. That is the American story.

People are tired of the establishments in both parties. And Trump, to his credit, is against the current carried interest subsidy enjoyed by Wall Street. (President Obama tried to close this loophole.)

Steve Watson, Thousand Oaks

..

To the editor: To those voters who support Trump mainly because he has been a successful businessman, please consider the following:

- Since 1900, two presidents were businessmen before becoming politicians: Herbert Hoover and George W. Bush. Hoover presided over the Great Depression, and Bush gave us the worst recession since the Great Depression.

- The “businessman” is the one who convinced us that automation would free us up at work to focus on our more complex tasks. Instead, automation has resulted in layoffs.

- The “businessman” has outsourced jobs away from America, lowered actual wages and reduced or eliminated healthcare benefits and pensions.

- The “businessman” has caused more than half of all full-time workers to work more than 40 hours a week.

- Business profits are soaring, yet the wealthiest 1% are banking most of the wealth created.

So, if you really think that the “businessman” is your best friend, keep supporting Trump. I'm sure he appreciates it.

David M. Galfond, Palmdale

Follow the Opinion section on Twitter @latimesopinion and Facebook