Los Angeles Times Opinion has asked Washington columnist Doyle McManus as well as other political observers to send their thoughts on the Republican Convention in Cleveland as it unfolds.

Doyle McManus: A failure so far

A modern political convention, now that it’s no longer about choosing a nominee, is supposed to be a well-crafted infomercial – a four-day miniseries that energizes party loyalists and attracts undecided voters into their camp. By that measure, after its first two days, Donald Trump’s shambolic gathering is failing.

It isn’t unifying the Republican Party. It isn’t making Trump more appealing to skeptics. It hasn’t offered much solace to audiences who feel demeaned by some of Trump’s language: women, African Americans, Latinos.

Trump’s campaign manager, Paul Manafort, has said his goal this week is to “expand” voters’ view of Trump and win some converts, just as Ronald Reagan did in 1980. And yet he started off the festivities by denouncing Ohio Gov. John Kasich – who is not attending the convention, even though it’s in his own state – as “dumb, dumb, dumb.” “When is John Kasich going to grow up?” he asked. (In victory, magnanimity.)

Then the Trump majority refused to give minority #NeverTrump delegates a roll call vote on rules changes, even though they were almost certain to lose. “He’s shown us that we’re not wanted,” said Kendal Unruh, a Ted Cruz delegate.

Meanwhile, the convention speakers have focused more on the depredations of Barack Obama and Hillary Clinton than on the hitherto undetected virtues of the man the GOP nominated on Tuesday.

A parade of politicians and minor celebrities accused Obama of ignoring terrorism (not really true) and presiding over higher crime rates (definitely not true). One, soap opera actor Antonio Sabato Jr., said after his speech that he is “absolutely” sure Obama is a Muslim (also not true). Ben Carson said Clinton is dangerous because she once sought advice from radical scholar Saul Alkinsky, whom he described as an admirer of Lucifer. (He wasn’t.)

Slamming the other party is a compulsory exercise at a political convention, of course. And loathing Clinton may be the glue that holds the GOP together. But many of the speakers nearly forgot to talk up the man they want to be president.

“One remarkable thing about this campaign is that you have a large number of undecided voters, mostly because they don’t like either candidate,” GOP pollster David Winston told me.

“Those voters don’t know how to choose between them. They need a framework for making a decision. And the convention can help provide that.”

He added, “It can’t just be about why the other side is wrong. The candidates … have to define their visions of a future for the country.”

That’s a good description of what’s been missing from Trump’s campaign, and an explanation for why he’s lagging behind Clinton in all but a few polls. The convention is supposed to change that, but so far it’s been a series of missed opportunities.

Not until late Tuesday, the convention’s second evening, did anyone talk at length about Trump’s character in new and positive ways. The most effective was his 22-year-old daughter, Tiffany Trump, who said he dad “draws out the talent and drive in people.” But by then, many views who weren’t already sold on Trump may have tuned out.

Campaign manager Manafort says Trump needs a “bounce” from the GOP convention to open a path to victory in November. The way his week has gone so far, he’s not going to get one.

doyle.mcmanus@latimes.com

Twitter: @DoyleMcManus

David Litt: Melania’s plagiarism

In the words of Melania Trump, “It is amazing what you can accomplish if you do not care who gets the credit.”

This is something I thought about often four years ago, when I was part of the speechwriting team at the Democratic National Convention. There were about a dozen of us responsible for the remarks of just about anyone without an “OTUS” in their job title.

Every speech, no matter how small, was subject to thorough quality control. First, strict time limits were imposed – if a speech was long, even by a single word, it would be sent back for revisions. Next, drafts were edited by Jeff Nussbaum and Ken Baer, two veteran writers. After that, speeches were fact-checked by the research department to make sure they were accurate. The message was clear: It’s important to get even the little things right. As Melania Trump once said, “God is in the details.”

Apparently, her husband never got the message. On Monday, we saw what happens when a political team leaves quality entirely to chance. Trump counter-programmed his own convention with interviews on the Golf Channel and Fox News. A 45-minute opus from retired Lt. Gen. Michael Flynn pushed Sen. Joni Ernst out of prime-time. And of course, Melania Trump delivered remarks that were plagiarized from Michelle Obama’s, eight years before.

On a campaign, disorder leads to minor embarrassments. But in theory, the next stop for the Trump Train is the White House, a place where even tiny mistakes have enormous consequences. Imagine Melania’s speechwriting team responding to a mass shooting. Imagine this lack of competence – and even more, this lack of interest in competence – transplanted from a greenroom to the situation room. A spouse’s plagiarized speech doesn’t tell us much about a candidate. But the missteps that lead to plagiarism speak volumes.

David Litt wrote speeches for President Obama from 2011-2016, and is currently the head writer/producer for Funny or Die D.C.

James Kirchick: The coming coup

Americans viewing the recent failed coup attempt in Turkey as some exotic foreign news story – the latest, violent yet hardly unusual political development to occur in a region constantly beset by turmoil – should pause to consider that the prospect of similar instability would not be unfathomable in this country if Trump were to win the presidency.