To the editor: When Donald Trump proclaimed some weeks ago that he has done more than any other candidate to energize voters, he got that right. He appears to be the biggest factor responsible for voter identification with the Democratic Party. ("Donald Trump is now the least popular American politician in three decades," April 1)

As to the claim that Trump is a “politician,” can that term be applied to Trump?

If “politician” is defined as a person who acts in a manipulative and devious way, typically to gain advancement within an organization, then yes. However, if “politician” is defined as one who is professionally involved in politics, absolutely not. Trump is a businessman and a second-rate entertainment figure who has manipulated the American electorate by taking advantage of legitimate voter disenchantment with the policies and candidates of an established political party.

While all this makes for high drama and the most interesting election in many decades, it remains unclear if this turmoil bodes well for America.

Mark M. Williams, Pasadena

..

To the editor: For about a year, we've endured almost daily affronts to civility and common sense from the 2016 presidential campaign. And the election is still more than half a year away.

Yet I remain undecided about whether the U.S. should adopt laws enacted by other countries to limit election campaigning to just a few months. After all, it's taken about a year for public scrutiny to finally weigh on the outrageous Trump juggernaut and, hopefully, prompt its implosion.

Our gullible voting masses apparently need a lot of time to vet even the most implausible of candidates.

Gene Martinez, Orcutt, Calif.

..

To the editor: As a lifelong conservative Republican, I do not often agree with what is printed in The Times. However, I strongly agree that Trump will lead the GOP to a disastrous landslide loss not seen since 1964 election should he secure the Republican presidential nomination.

I hope and pray my fellow Republicans will get a clue before it's too late.

Geoffrey C. Church, Los Angeles

Follow the Opinion section on Twitter @latimesopinion and Facebook