To the editor: I can't count the number of times The Times has ticked me off with its ideologically extreme “rhetoric.” But I take personal responsibility for my actions. Accordingly, I have never invaded your offices to disrupt your staff from publishing this paper's odious opinions. ("It's time for Republican voters to reject Trump and his reckless rhetoric," editorial, March 15)

You blame Trump for inviting hostility with his “rhetoric” while effectively excusing the misbehavior of irresponsible reactionaries. What you are encouraging is a heckler's veto, an unconstitutional abridgment of another's freedom of expression.

Rather than excusing such behavior and blaming Trump for not expressing his views in a way more to your liking, you ought to be demanding the protesters stand down from attacking what journalist Anthony Lewis has referred to as the “freedom for the thought we hate.”

Bill Becker, Los Angeles

..

To the editor: Your editorial clearly condemns Trump's “reckless rhetoric.” Yes, so what else is new?

While discussion saturates the news and editorial pages regarding his incendiary words, there is no focus on the essence of what is going on.

Minorities and advocates of tolerance and equality are terrorized by an existential threat. This is not about philosophical disagreement. There is a real fear that this country may end up with a racist demagogue as the president.

At his Kansas City rally, Trump referred to demonstrators as “garbage” and said he will “take our country back from them.” Trump's threatening words have turned this into a mission of survival for those who live in fear they will be targeted by a Trump regime.

William Goldman, Palos Verdes Estates

..

To the editor: The leading candidate for the GOP's nomination has actually done America a favor by exposing the sordid, racist underbelly of some of its citizens. Although I am disgusted with the campaign, I'm not afraid of the outcome.

If you do the math, about one-quarter of Americans actually identify as Republican. Angry GOP racists have voted not even at a 50% level for their leader. Sure, there are some first-time voters who support this violence, but in the end it will be a very small percentage compared to independents and some Republicans who realize that they cannot vote for a xenophobe who encourages this anger and violence.

The reality is that there is no possible way that the end result is something to worry about. And any rational adult knows that a vote for a narcissistic racist would be a disaster for the United States.

A page must be taken out of B.F. Skinner's studies; extinction of this scourge will be the result.

L. John Ernst, Chatsworth

Follow the Opinion section on Twitter @latimesopinion and Facebook