To the editor: As past president and a longtime steering committee member of the Citizens Committee to Save Elysian Park, I have borne witness to many inappropriate proposals for the park, some of the most recent being zip-lining and mountain biking. Changing the name of Elysian Park Avenue to Vin Scully Avenue seems harmless enough until you look at the big picture. ("Opening day for Vin Scully Ave.," editorial, April 12)

Before Dodger Stadium was built, there was only Elysian Park Drive through the park. After the stadium opened in 1962, we got Stadium Way and Academy Road (for the Los Angeles Police Academy). In changing Elysian Park Avenue, the city has effectively wiped out any Elysian Park identification from outside access and instead turned the park's main thoroughfares into heralds of big business and law enforcement.

Vin Scully is a fine announcer and has left a wonderful Dodger legacy, but it would have been far more appropriate to have given his name to something inside the grounds of Dodger Stadium.

Sallie W. Neubauer, Los Angeles

..

To the editor: There can be no loss of irony in noting that while the Dodgers and the city of Los Angeles honored the great Vin Scully on his final opening day, the team and Time Warner Cable simultaneously dishonored two-thirds of its TV fan base in Los Angeles, many of whom have supported the team since its arrival in 1958, by perpetuating the blackout fiasco they engineered together.

Scully's wonderful legacy of timeless, peerless announcing will live on. So too will the legacy of the Dodgers ownership and Time Warner Cable's adherence to the doctrine of greed and arrogance.

Bill Waxman, Simi Valley

..

To the editor: Renaming the street that leads from Sunset Boulevard to the main entrance of Dodger Stadium Vin Scully Avenue is a fitting tribute to the beloved man who has done more to ignite passion for Dodger baseball than anyone.

As the street leads the way into the ballpark, would it be even more poignant if it were called Vin Scully Parkway?

Doug Zabilski, Santa Clarita

Follow the Opinion section on Twitter @latimesopinion and Facebook