To the editor: Yes, there are some who have chosen to remain in Porter Ranch, but for a variety of reasons. For a person like Roberta Cohen, who was quoted in this article, it's her choice to stay, but it seems petty for her to say others should suck it in and tolerate it because “it's nothing.” ("No, the gas leak hasn't turned Porter Ranch into a ghost town," Jan. 30)

Many have left to protect the health of their family members. If I had a small child, I would have been one of the first to insist on relocation. Remember, there are no studies of the long-term effects of massive amounts of these compounds on our health.

The Southern California Gas Co. has been dishonest about the leak from the beginning. It has no credibility with the residents of the northern San Fernando Valley. It is being forced to provide the rentals and air purifiers.

Many of the wells in the Aliso Canyon storage facility are many decades old; the one that's leaking doesn't have a safety valve. How many more wells don't?

Patty Glueck, Porter Ranch

..

To the editor: Cohen appears uninformed on some of the “facts” she gave. In particular, when a family relocates, it doesn't “get money” from So Cal Gas. Relocated families remain responsible for their mortgage, utilities, homeowners insurance and association dues.

The rent payments for the temporary housing are made directly to the landlord, not the relocated residents. People who have relocated to a place with a kitchen do not get money for food. People getting money for food are those who don't have a kitchen and therefore must incur that expense because they are staying in a hotel.

After having to leave your house, you find that certain personal items are missed enough to go back to get them. Others return to make sure their homes have not been burglarized or to pick up mail. Some move things around and put out garbage cans to deter thieves.

Cohen is fortunate that exposure to the gas is not having a negative effect on her health. Unfortunately, the same cannot be said for everyone.

Michelle E. Diaz, Northridge

Follow the Opinion section on Twitter @latimesopinion and Facebook