Photo

At a Senate hearing on Tuesday, John Stumpf, the chairman and chief executive of Wells Fargo, gave the Banking Committee a non-apology for the bank’s pervasive abuse of customers.

True, Mr. Stumpf repeatedly said he was sorry that 5,300 (now fired) employees had illegally opened millions of unauthorized accounts in order to meet aggressive sales targets. But as several senators pointed out, the contrition rang hollow, because Mr. Stumpf has not held himself or other top managers accountable. He has not offered to resign. He has not fired any senior executives. He has not forfeited any compensation received while the fraud was inflating the bank’s performance, nor has he endorsed clawing back the pay of other culpable executives.

So far, Wells Fargo has settled with regulators for $185 million in fines, plus restitution to customers who incurred fees on the sham accounts. That was a record settlement for some of the government agencies involved in the case. But for Wells Fargo, the sum was not deemed “material,” according to Mr. Stumpf’s testimony. Perhaps there is more punishment to come, because as the hearing made clear, the problems go beyond bogus fees.

For example, under questioning, Mr. Stumpf could not say how Wells Fargo would redress harm to customers whose credit scores may have been damaged by credit cards opened without their consent. Senator Jon Tester, Democrat of Montana, pointed out that customers who pay an extra half of a percentage point on a mortgage, because unauthorized credit had lowered their credit scores, would each pay $50,000 more in interest over the life of a 30-year $500,000 mortgage.

Mr. Stumpf also deflected questions about Wells Fargo’s practice of requiring the scammed customers to press their claims against the bank through individual arbitration rather than suing in court. Like other banks, Wells Fargo routinely adds a clause to the fine print of financial contracts that requires customers to submit to arbitration if there are disputes. The clauses also typically prohibit customers from joining together in class-action lawsuits. Starting in 2013, after the scam at Wells Fargo had been underway for at least two years, some customers tried to sue over the sham accounts. But the bank blocked the cases by successfully asserting that the mandatory arbitration clauses in the contracts for the customers’ real accounts also applied to the fake accounts — a maneuver that allowed the scam to persist.

Sign Up for the Opinion Today Newsletter Every weekday, get thought-provoking commentary from Op-Ed columnists, the Times editorial board and contributing writers from around the world. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

Regulators have proposed rules to curb the use of arbitration clauses in financial contracts, in part on the ground that they foster misconduct. But asked if Wells Fargo would stop fighting customers who want to sue over their phony accounts, Mr. Stumpf said he was no expert on the matter and would have his legal team get back to the committee.

Mr. Stumpf also lacked good answers about possible widespread wrongful dismissals of employees who were fired when they did not meet the sales quotas that the bank now admits were ill advised. Senator Sherrod Brown, Democrat of Ohio, asked Mr. Stumpf whether his conscience prompted him to “make it up” to those people. Mr. Stumpf replied that he hadn’t “talked to our H.R. team.”

Federal prosecutors have opened criminal investigations into the scandal. Lawmakers have also called for the Securities and Exchange Commission to investigate. Wells Fargo’s problems are not yet over, because the problems of its customers, employees and investors still linger.