To the editor: Andrew J. Bacevich rightly posits that the composition of our armed forces should reflect the character of American society. Plus, he notes that our all-volunteer force, even as augmented by shadowy private contractors (“a.k.a. mercenaries”), has not always been sufficient to counter worldwide military threats. ("Should women register for the draft? That's the wrong question to ask about our military," Opinion, Feb. 14)

With the enviable freedoms and opportunities afforded us as citizens of the world's preeminent democracy, no one — male nor female, lower class nor upper class — should begrudge registration for the draft.

Being activated through the Selective Service System need not consign a registrant to a couple years of military duty. Alternative service — say, longer and less remunerative stints in benevolent organizations like the Peace Corps or AmeriCorps — could be an option.

Universal draft registration would do more than promote a sense of shared commitment and gender equality. It likely would give pause to politicians inclined to initiate wars of discretion on the backs of working-class males.

David Schaffer, Santa Monica

..

To the editor: When a private contractor is wounded, injured or killed in combat, the U.S. government is off the hook for any restitution or benefits. The U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs has no obligation, and it therefore becomes a worker's compensation claim to be made against whatever company employed the contractors.

I support some sort of draft in which people can choose public service over a potential combat role. Americans, both men and women, should have to serve in some way, with no deferments other than legitimate medical ones.

People live a long time now. A couple of years out of their lives serving their country seems like time well spent.

Martin Schoen, Sierra Madre

..

To the editor: Really? Sen. Ted Cruz (R-Texas) feels that the very idea of requiring women to register for the draft is “immoral”?

So does Cruz — who bills himself as staunchly pro-Israel — plan to counsel Israel's leaders on the immorality of conscripting adult females? It could be a tough sell. After all, Israel long has defended itself from formidable foreign aggression by maintaining crack combat forces filled with conscripts of both genders.

This is an admirable, not immoral, tack.

Betty Turner, Sherman Oaks

Follow the Opinion section on Twitter @latimesopinion and Facebook