To the editor: Another terrorist attack, and with it we have more condolences, enhanced security and statements of solidarity and defiance. When will the words end and action begin? When will we realize it is in the interest of all nations to collectively stand up to terrorism, wherever it exists? ("Hunt is on for Brussels bombings suspect; Islamic State warns of more, worse attacks," March 23)

It is not possible to defend against these savages. The best defense is to totally disrupt and demoralize them with an overwhelming offense.

What does it take to know we are at war with a dangerous enemy who will cause chaos in countries across the world until it is confronted by massive force? How many more people need to die? What does it take for our leaders to determine the time to strike decisively is now?

Sid Pelston, Marina del Rey

..

To the editor: I imagine the world's “peaceful” Muslims might feel as if they're in a bind as more “devout” followers are committing acts of violence in the name of their religion.

I don't think it's entirely fair to single out Muslims right now. It's just a matter of historical timing.

Take Christianity. Jesus consistently preached nonviolence. And yet, was it not Christianity that brought us the Crusades, the Inquisition and witch hunts? What about the horrors that Christian missionaries wreaked upon indigenous peoples during colonial times?

In both cases, the perpetrators sincerely believed they were doing God's bidding. So, is it the religion or the practitioner? One could then easily argue that there is no such thing as a “peaceful” religion as long as there are fanatics practicing it.

So, what do we do? Perhaps, eventually, this too shall pass.

Arthur G. Saginian, Santa Clarita

..

To the editor: Words cannot express how deeply frightened I am by the attacks in Brussels, the de facto capital of Europe. An attack on that city is an attack against democratic Europe and the cherished ideals it represents.

Throughout their histories, European nations have witnessed numerous grave ordeals, but they managed to turn their dark pages and rise from the ashes. We should not be blackmailed by or kneel down to terrorists in Brussels or anywhere else in the world.

Still, it is clear that none of our counter-terrorism strategies has nipped the problem of terrorism in the bud. It is time to reevaluate our approaches, give unwavering solidarity to the disaffected and marginalized and give every person a voice of hope for the future.

Munjed Farid Al Qutob, London

Follow the Opinion section on Twitter @latimesopinion and Facebook