To the editor: This article on Donald Trump’s rambling post-convention news conference reminded me of the Richard Nixon enemies list. (“Donald Trump says he wouldn't accept Ted Cruz's endorsement even if it were offered,” July 22)

Trump’s penchant for holding grudges and his obsessive need to attack over every perceived slight is disturbing. I can’t help but wonder about the size of Trump’s “enemies list” already. He has not even waited to ascend to the presidency (heaven help us) to reveal himself as having lots of enemies.

Trump attacks not because he has to but because he likes to. Simply disagreeing with him puts one on the fast track to his list. We could all become his enemies. It doesn’t take that much to cross this caricature of a candidate.

Joel Lander, Huntington Beach

See the most-read stories this hour >>

To the editor: After a few teleprompter moments of grace during his nomination speech, Trump reverted back to form by ranting against Sen. Ted Cruz (R-Texas) while his running mate, Indiana Gov. Mike Pence, stood by alternately chuckling and smiling beatifically while appearing to me to look increasingly uncomfortable.

By many accounts Pence is a decent man if an unremarkable governor. One can only wonder why such an individual would hitch his star to someone of Trump’s caliber. Whatever his reason, he’d better get used to more of the same between now and election day.

Perhaps, in his spare time, Pence can research “are you allowed to set up a super PAC if you are the president, to fight somebody?” as Trump asked Friday. Alternatively, he could hawk some Trump campaign products to earn extra income, which he may very well need come Nov. 9.

That is, if Trump doesn’t stiff Pence, as he reportedly has a penchant to do.

Jan Jay Judah, Torrance

Follow the Opinion section on Twitter @latimesopinion and Facebook

MORE FROM OPINION

The media has cried wolf about GOP candidates for ages. Now no one will listen to warnings on Trump

Is homelessness a priority or not?

Trump's opposition research firm: Russia's intelligence agencies