To the editor: Here’s my open letter to Democratic presidential candidate Sen. Bernie Sanders:

I am an 84-year-old Socialist from Brooklyn. You have been a hero to me for many years. I am amazed by what you have accomplished. You have succeeded in moving presumptive presidential nominee Hillary Clinton and the Democratic Party to the left. You created a movement that has involved young voters. You set goals for our government to reach for. The whole world knows who “Bernie” is and what his beliefs are.

But movements seldom succeed in their first election. The differences between the Democratic and Republican parties are wider than ever before.

Donald Trump is not capable of being our president. Clinton is clearly better prepared to lead the country both in foreign affairs and domestic issues. Please, Bernie, do what is right and needed for our country. Put your support behind Clinton now to defeat this dangerous demagogue.

Walter Kornbluh, Sherman Oaks

..

To the editor: Sanders got shellacked in California. He has said he will continue to fight until the last primary, and that he will take his fight to the Democratic National Convention next month.

I feel sorry for him because he doesn’t understand that he could be on the cusp of greatness.

Clinton has achieved what no woman has in this country. Her legacy is born and created. Sanders could also achieve greatness. There is a difference between getting beat and losing. His behavior, if it continues negatively, will cast him as a loser.

If, on the other hand, Sanders calls his minions to unite, to support the party, to support Clinton, he will be seen as a great unifier who saved the country from Trump.

Carlos Magallanes, Pasadena

..

To the editor: Adopting many of the left-wing positions taken by Sanders supporters into the Democratic Party platform carries major risks. (“Bernie Sanders supporters have to face the facts: Hillary Clinton has won,” editorial, June 7)

There are millions of moderate conservatives disgusted with Trump and who are potential voters for Clinton. Thus, Clinton will need go out of her way to identify with issues important to them while noting that she will be their president also.

She cannot “bring the country together” as intended by simply taking far-left stances and and ignoring more moderate conservatives.

John C. McKinney, Cerritos

..

To the editor: As a poll worker, I believe many voters could have avoided problems themselves. (“'It was just chaos': Broken machines, incomplete voter rolls leave some wondering whether their ballots will count,” June 7)

A lot of voters had to fill out provisional ballots after receiving vote-by-mail ballots that they did not surrender to us. If people don’t want to vote by mail, they shouldn’t request the ballot to do so and then expect to vote at the polls without accounting for the other ballot.

Also, many people did not read directions to vote for only one U.S. Senate candidate, causing ballots to be returned and voters to start all over again. We kept announcing this but it didn’t help. People were also confused about voting rules, if they could change parties and so on.

As a reader of The Times, I know that these issues were addressed multiple times well in advance of the election. We all have an obligation to be informed voters. If you are, your next visit to the polls could run much smoother.

Christina Fetcho, Los Angeles

Follow the Opinion section on Twitter @latimesopinion and Facebook