To the editor: Riveting. Excellent serial reading. Question: How in the world can either or both Easters get back their law licenses?

Re “Framed: “Convicted and disgraced, with still farther to fall,” Sept. 4

Gary Gorlick, Beverly Hills

::

To the editor: I have dealt directly with countless police

officers and attorneys throughout my adult life (police officer and deputy district attorney in Los Angeles County) and

have experienced the entire spectrum of performance.

This excellent series offers a classic example of thorough and professional police work and dedicated effort on the part of the prosecutor. How easy it would have been to simply have made a clearly legal and justified arrest and either secured a guilty plea or gone to trial on a “slam-dunk” drug case.

How refreshing to see a just and proper outcome — an innocent person “rescued” from the utterly vindictive acts of two spoiled neophytes who may have successfully completed law school and passed the bar, but failed to learn common decency and good judgment during their studies.

Jim Weyant, Big Bear City

::

To the editor: Yes, it was a compellingly written story. Yes, there was great police work. Yes, justice appears to have been served. But I still get a queasy feeling that it did make a spectacle of mental illness and codependency.

Hyman Milstein, MD, Studio City

::

To the editor: The six-part saga ends with no good guys. Once Kelli Peters had extracted a pound of flesh by the conviction and ruin of the Easters, why did she need to totally consume them — not to mention the children — with a $5.7-million lawsuit? God save us. I won’t be buying her book.

Jacqueline Knowles, Altadena

::

To the editor: The series of articles is tawdry and disgusting, not front-page for The Times.

Marcia Barnett, Laguna Beach

::

To the editor: Just finished the last piece on this very well-written series. I’ve got many words to describe the lovely couple who were rightfully prosecuted for their actions, but don’t think the paper would print any of them.

As a retired federal law enforcement officer, my hat is off to the fine job done by the “boys in blue” and the assistant district attorney. The arrogance shown by the defendants is incomprehensible. And to top it off, they hide behind the safeguards built into the legal system, which they exploited.

Steve Walsh, Redondo Beach

::

To the editor: Much valuable front-page space has been given to this series. The author frequently asked about the Easters’ motivation — and the reader would expect the answer to be given. But after reading the final installment, I do not find that this question was answered, there was no resolution to the story, and little was ever said about the effect of the whole episode on the Easters’ son. This story belonged in a tabloid.

Leonard Lipman M.D., Santa Monica

::

To the editor: Thanks for the very good mystery series by Christopher Goffard. It shows how our justice system works and that fact can be stranger than fiction.

Clive Soden, Corona del Mar

Follow the Opinion section on Twitter @latimesopinion and Facebook