To the editor: Republican presidential candidate Donald Trump is reaping the short-term benefits of his divisive campaign. But he is not creating a polarized America, he is merely expertly exploiting the long-standing fractures in our body politic. ("It's time for Republican voters to reject Trump and his reckless rhetoric," editorial, March 15)

As Americans, we seem to dislike our leaders and we fear any neighbor who is not like us. These problems did not occur overnight. Since President Clinton's impeachment in 1998, there has been an unending criticism of politicians left and right. When all leaders except the few we support are seen as liars and elitists, it is easy for political outsiders to claim the moral high ground.

Many of us now live in opinion monocultures, where outlandish conspiracies and name calling

are rarely challenged. Here, a Trump-like campaign can easily find room to grow.

In the long run, as Abraham Lincoln warned, a house divided against itself cannot stand.

Oliver Cutshaw, Los Angeles

..

To the editor: Over the last several days, we have seen the snarling, foaming-at-the-mouth face of fascism in American politics. It belongs not to Trump, but to members of the left, who in one generation have gone from the champions of free speech to its mortal enemies.

Judging by the successful attempt Friday to have Trump's rally in Chicago shut down, they are the self-appointed arbiters of what speech is correct and acceptable and what speech will be silenced.

Jordan Chodorow, Los Angeles

..

To the editor: Trump says it would have been easier to attend the Chicago rally, but he didn't want to see anyone hurt, so he canceled it.

I was not at the rally, but I have seen extensive footage. Before the event was canceled, there was no indication of violence. Opposing viewpoints from individuals in and outside the venue, yes, but violence, no. His spokesman managed to make the cancellation announcement unimpeded.

Trump's cancellation was an act of cowardice; his team made the assessment that too many people with opposing views had made it into the venue, and Trump has no idea how to handle anyone who disagrees with him.

Claire Chik, Torrance

..

To the editor: Democratic presidential candidate Bernie Sanders missed the boat in criticizing Trump for the violence at his campaign rallies.

Sanders had an opportunity to point out that regardless of Trump's views, he is entitled to express them, and those who assemble are entitled to hear them. The fact

that disruptions are handled with disturbing brutality does not change this fact.

Now Trump has threatened to send supporters to Sanders' rallies, creating the specter of banana republic-style political violence. Both sides should consider Thomas Jefferson's comments on “the safety with which error of opinion may be tolerated where there is reason left to combat it.”

Sanders' failure to respond with such reason and de-escalate this threat stands as a conspicuous failure of leadership.

Daniel J. Stone, Los Angeles

Follow the Opinion section on Twitter @latimesopinion and Facebook