To the editor: Thanks to George Skelton for reminding Californians that what made our state exceptional was free tuition at California's public universities and colleges. ("Bernie Sanders' idea for free tuition at public colleges deserves an A," May 9)

We had it here, and it worked. Students and an exceptional cadre of educators flocked to our higher education system for the reason that it was affordable, high quality and vibrant. The result was the California economic miracle.

Skelton also gives Democratic presidential candidate Sen. Bernie Sanders his due for his effort to make higher education affordable for all. I had a long talk with my twentysomething niece recently, and she explained in detail the many fears and real obstacles that today's youth face. We need to listen to them.

Walter Dominguez, Los Angeles

..

To the editor: As someone who worked on Robert Kennedy's Senate staff, I resent Skelton using his name in connection with Sanders' plan to make attending college free. Kennedy was a pragmatist as well as an idealist, and I have no doubt that he would reject Sanders' plan as unrealistic just as Democratic presidential candidate Hillary Clinton has done, given that it requires matching funds from participating states.

Let's face it: If California had the revenue to continue to finance free tuition without cutting other programs, we would never have done away with it in the first place. So what other program's funding are we willing to slash? Healthcare for the poor, welfare benefits, K-12 education, police protection, fire departments?

Sadly, I am forced to conclude that Skelton's idea is just as half-baked as Sanders'.

Donna Chaffee, Los Angeles

..

To the editor: I got my bachelor's degree in engineering from UCLA in 1955 with free tuition. My parents were poor, I lived at home and worked summers to pay for fees and other expenses.

Then, in 1964, I received my master's in engineering with the aid of extension classes. I worked continuously until my retirement in 2011.

None of this would have been possible without free tuition. If it is not possible now, there must be workarounds such as the means test that UC Regent John A. Perez suggests.

The 1950s were golden in the Golden State. Sales tax was about 3%, houses were cheap, and still the state could afford free tuition. Certainly a path to at least low-cost college, if not outright free tuition, can be found with all of the creative brain power in California.

Allan Eiseman, Pasadena

..

To the editor: We know there is no such thing as a free lunch. College should be “free,” but with a catch.

Bill each college student for a limited number of college credits to be completed in a limited number of years. If they graduate, tear up the bill and it's a free ride. If they don't graduate, the students have a certain number of years to pay up for their party time.

In other words, students should earn their free education.

Robert Bubnovich, Irvine

..

To the editor: In reading Skelton's column, I'm struck by one idea: the idea that, despite the headline and Skelton's conclusion, his argument is actually an endorsement of Clinton's “affordable college for all” plan.

Jane Drucker, Studio City

Follow the Opinion section on Twitter @latimesopinion and Facebook