Debaters Faiza Patel is the co-director of the Liberty and National Security Program at the Brennan Center for Justice at New York University Law School. She is on Twitter.

Paul Rosenzweig, a principal at Red Branch Consulting, is a former deputy assistant secretary for policy at the United States Department of Homeland Security.

Allow Early Investigations to Be More Open-Ended Could federal law enforcement have done more to prevent the recent terrorist attacks in San Bernardino, Orlando and New York City? Probably. Should they have? That’s a harder question since no suite of steps could be taken without some countervailing costs. Tie them to significant indicators of a potential threat so investigations focus on situations reflecting reasonable grounds for suspicion. To begin with, though, we should acknowledge that much of what law enforcement is doing already is working. Numbers vary and are dependent on definitions, but something on the order of 90 terrorist incidents have occurred in the United States since 9/11 — and fewer than 15 of them have been successful. Of those that did not result in damage, the vast majority were foiled by law enforcement before the terrorists came close to causing injury. Our record, then, is one of relative success. So the adjustments we need are more in the nature of modest modifications than wholesale changes. Still, there is room for improvement — in particular, the rate of successful attacks is increasing in the most recent months. This appears to be principally because terrorist targeting and methodology is morphing to attack more soft targets — a trend we see in the recent New York/New Jersey bombings and also in the Paris café attacks. We need to change our investigative rules to accommodate the new reality which, if it can be characterized, mostly involves the long-term process of slow domestic radicalization followed by a relatively quick ramp-up from dissatisfaction to violent action. This suggests that we need to revisit the F.B.I.’s domestic investigation guidelines. They are drafted, in large part, to reflect public concern with F.B.I. abuse and overreaching — and as such they put significant limits on F.B.I. activity. But the limits imposed no longer match the reality of the need. For example, what the F.B.I. calls a “preliminary investigation” generally has a strict six-month time limit. It requires an administrative effort to extend such an investigation. Given what we are learning about domestic terrorism, those time limits (and their attending limits on the types of investigative techniques that can be used) are no longer realistic. So, we should probably adopt terrorism-investigation guidelines that have a more open-ended time frame. We could tie them to significant indicators of potential terrorist threat — Rahami’s travel to Pakistan combined with his father’s warning would be good examples of qualifying indicia — so that investigations were focused on situations that reflected reasonable grounds for suspicion. There is more, of course, but for now simply recognizing that the threat is changing is the first step. Would this have been effective in preventing all the recent attacks? We can’t know what the counter-factual would be. What we can and do know, is that as the threat changes our response must adapt as well.

More Surveillance Doesn’t Mean Greater Safety It is tempting to think that the F.B.I. should have done more to keep tabs on Rahami, Matteen and Tsarnaev. But we should resist the temptation. Tracking more people is unlikely to make us any safer, but it would certainly result in open-ended investigations of thousands of Americans not suspected of any wrongdoing. The F.B.I. has ample authority to probe anyone suspected of having extremist ties. As The New York Times reported, F.B.I. agents “constantly monitor chat rooms, the Islamic State’s Twitter accounts and other online traffic” to identify and track individuals who may be interested in joining the group’s cause. They undoubtedly do the same for other terrorist groups. Tracking more people would lead to open-ended investigations of thousands of Americans not suspected of any wrongdoing. The bureau can also open a low-level investigation called an assessment whenever it determines that there is an “authorized purpose” such as protecting against national-security threats regardless of whether it has particular information suggesting wrongdoing. Even a full investigation, which makes more intrusive techniques available, requires only an “articulable factual basis” that “reasonably indicates” someone is planning criminal acts. This standard is “substantially lower” than the probable cause required for a search warrant or wiretap. Keeping files open when even these low standards are not met will only further burden a system that is already under pressure from too much information, most of it irrelevant. The vast majority of assessments come up empty. In a recent two-year period, the F.B.I. opened 82,325 assessments, of which roughly 4 percent justified further investigation. Only a very few resulted in prosecutions (fortunately, terrorism remains rare in the United States, accounting for a few dozen out of 14,000 murders per year). Nor should thousands of Americans be kept indefinitely under government watch when they are not suspected of wrongdoing, particularly based on vague notions of “extremism.” The First Amendment protects all speech because the founders understood how easy it is subvert democracy by branding dissenting voices as unacceptable. We cannot know for sure whether the F.B.I. missed something in its investigations that might have stopped Rahami or the others. But we do know that violence of any kind is near impossible to predict. There is no profile of someone who becomes a terrorist or checklist of indicators. Things that seem relevant after someone has committed an act of violence — e.g., anger over government policies or increasing religiosity — are simply not uncommon. Hindsight is 20/20, real time is not.

Dig Deeper Into Government Files and Social Media Hindsight is, indeed, 20/20. But to give up on the possibility of foresight and to reduce ourselves to the lament that violence is unpredictable is to despair and to let our fear of government overwhelm our faith in effective government action. Before turning to some of the other effective measures that might be considered in the wake of the New York attacks, it is useful to pause briefly and ask why it is that greater F.B.I. powers are opposed. Perhaps one doubts their effectiveness, but the more likely answer is a fear of abuse. There's no need for abusive measures. No physical surveillance, wiretaps or internet monitoring. Just a thorough look at what's known. Given the F.B.I.'s history in the last century, fear is not unreasonable – but it misses that we are living in a different time. The robust oversight mechanisms now in place -- as well as the work of N.G.O.s like the Brennan Center who stand as watchdogs against misconduct -- make large scale abuse unlikely. What more, then, might the F.B.I. have done? Consider what public reports say happened in the case of Ahmad Rahami. After his father made a claim of possible terrorist connections to the local police, the father was interviewed by the F.B.I, the terrorism task force checked public data bases and looked at the records of other federal agencies. They found the Department of Homeland Security record of his past travel to Istanbul (a jumping off point for Syria) and Pakistan, but they discounted it. And that’s it. After two weeks the assessment was closed. Even without the benefit of hindsight, we might question that process. This is not the first time that we have disregarded the warnings of family members. And, as I noted above, the morphing of the terrorist threat means that we must attach even greater importance to the collection of intelligence through human observation. The father’s claim, even if indefinite in nature, ought to have prompted a review of Rahami’s social media posts, a deeper dive into why Homeland Security's automated targeting system had flagged him for inquiry, and a determination into whether the State Department or the intelligence community had records of his overseas activities of interest.



None of this would have been especially intrusive, or abusive. No physical surveillance, no wiretaps, no monitoring of his internet searches or private emails. Simply a more thorough look at existing records that were already in the government’s possession, along with a more searching examination of the public persona that he presented to the world. Perhaps after all that, we might also have decided to interview Rahami himself. If we are going to take the terror threat seriously, then we are going to have to put greater reliance on the warnings we receive from those inside the community, as a ground for action. Would this have prevented the attack? That’s the wrong question, and it is one for which we have no possible answer. The right question is, looking back, do we think we took all the reasonable steps we could have? And, assuredly, in that context, there is more we might do. In the long run, we need to develop a strategy to combat the long-range self-radicalization propaganda campaign of ISIS. Acting domestically is deeply problematic, given First Amendment concerns -- so I suspect that this aspect of our response will require action overseas by our intelligence agencies, rather than increased domestic authorities.