To the editor: I never thought I'd agree with Jonah Goldberg about anything, but once again Donald Trump made the unthinkable happen. ("Why conservatives need to get behind #NeverTrump," Opinion, March 1)

Goldberg has joined a panic-induced Twitter-fret over Trump likely gaining the Republican Party's nomination then, conceivably, winning the presidency. On this latter prospect, there is no daylight between Goldberg and myself: A Trump presidency would be an abomination.

Goldberg, arch-conservative commentator Erick Erickson and aspiring last-non-Trump-man-standing candidate Marco Rubio have locked hashtags to block Trump's march to the nomination. This is on top of other cries of dismay about Trump's hostile takeover among Republican poobahs.

I would say that, sadly, this is probably too little too late. But that would be hypocritical. There is nothing sad about the GOP's impending self-immolation. Ever since then-Senate Minority Leader Mitch McConnell declared in 2010 that defeating President Obama should be the top Republican objective — more important than getting immigration policy right, putting the economy on a more decent and secure footing or trying to ease suffering at home and abroad — the party has had it coming.

Claude Goldenberg, Seal Beach

..

To the editor: As a very conservative pro-life Republican, I never considered Trump to be presidential material. I've denounced his idiotic views to all of my conservative and liberal family friends since he started campaigning.

Let the party establishment realize that Republicans like me will not vote for Trump in the general election. Furthermore I will register as an independent if he's nominated. This will be the death of the Republican Party.

Mary Curtius, Reno

..

To the editor: Goldberg does not realize that many highly educated, informed individuals are supporting Trump because we want a big change in our political world.

I want both parties to come way back to the center, and if selecting an unpredictable yet believable candidate is what it takes, so be it. Looking at all the other candidates, I see love of entrenched power and distance from reality.

So, Goldberg, to turn your words, “My God, what have I done?” back on you: You have harmed the American electorate with your extremism.

M. Louise Greene, Pacific Palisades

..

To the editor: Goldberg's column is an unparalleled masterpiece of either self-preserving cynicism or complete self-delusion.

For someone like Goldberg, who has spent his adult life degrading and coarsening the political discourse, to act as if the co-opting of the Republican Party by “know-nothing bigots” (his actual words!) is a recent development is mind-boggling.

This has been decades in the making. Goldberg created this monster as much as anyone — he lovingly fed and raised it, in fact. I only hope that Goldberg and his ilk may actually, finally, pay a price.

Peter Ramsey, Los Angeles

..

To the editor: So, if it turns out that the election in November is between Trump and Hillary Clinton, am I to assume that Goldberg will write a piece about the lesser of two evils and wind up voting Democratic?

Won't that be a hoot!

After spending half of my adult life enduring the absurdity of presidential (I use that term loosely) campaigns, this one will end with a modicum of sweet justice, with Trump being trumped by Republicans coming to their senses.

Jerry Lasnik, Thousand Oaks

Follow the Opinion section on Twitter @latimesopinion and Facebook