To the editor: Recently I read about a new development in Porter Ranch. The piece noted the wonderful views, open spaces and so on, but it didn't say a word about the nearby natural gas storage facility. ("Close SoCalGas' facility in Aliso Canyon -- eventually," editorial, Dec. 20)

Now, we read about the homeowners who live near the leaking Aliso Canyon storage facility wanting to close it down or otherwise force Southern California Gas Co. to compensate them. There's absolutely nothing being said about the culpability of developers who built — and are still building — near that site.

We all use gas in some form or another, gas that has to be produced, transported and stored. We cannot demand ready access to the fuel on one hand and ignore the infrastructure needed to deliver it as “somebody else's problem.” Where and how we live are choices, and in this case the choice was to buy property near the storage facility.

The leak will get fixed eventually; it's a temporary inconvenience that will eventually be forgotten.

Martin Usher, Thousand Oaks

..

To the editor: I am pleased to see The Times including external costs into its argument over the cost-effectiveness of dirty energy. It is imperative that any discussion over the relative merits of renewable energy include health, environmental and military costs.

When critics of California's aggressive response to climate change trot out the cost of clean energy as a reason not to switch, we must counter that they are leaving the huge external costs out of their equations, rendering them useless.

This is the entire nut of our problem. These costs have never been included before, but now they must be included every time energy and climate change are discussed.

Paul Scott, Santa Monica

..

To the editor: We need to keep the Aliso Canyon natural gas storage field until alternate renewable energy sources can replace natural gas.

The field itself, nestled in the foothills of the Santa Susana Mountains, is the perfect place for wind energy. Every resident of Porter Ranch is familiar with our constant winds blowing over the hills and buffeting our homes.

With such a reliable wind source, let's replace the gas pipelines on our hills with wind mills for future green energy.

Peter Rothenberg, Porter Ranch

..

To the editor: Sometimes it takes a natural gas leak such as the one that has sickened families near Aliso Canyon for all of us to realize there is nothing cheap about the price of fossil fuels.

The methane over Porter Ranch should clarify our resolve to realize the true costs of our dependence. Only by putting a price on carbon emissions will we level the energy playing field and speed our transition to renewables, which are our best hedge against the huge costs of climate change.

That transition can't come soon enough. Just ask the people of Porter Ranch.

Dennis Arp, Brea

Follow the Opinion section on Twitter @latimesopinion and Facebook