To some of The Times’ letter writers, 2016 is shaping up to be the “hold your nose and vote” election.

This week, Democratic candidate Hillary Clinton learned she will not face criminal charges related to her “extremely careless” use (FBI Director James B. Comey’s words) of a non-government email account while secretary of State. Meanwhile, Republican candidate Donald Trump fended off accusations of anti-Semitism after sending out an tweet accusing Clinton of corruption that included an image of a six-pointed star over a pile of money.

Although both candidates still have ardent supporters among our letter writers (more so for Clinton), readers are increasingly expressing dismay over their choices this November. Here are some of their letters.

Glendora resident Rick Trudeau reconsiders the importance of voting in 2016:

Trump has a record of sketchy, allegedly fraudulent practices with Trump University and with some of his casinos in Atlantic City, N.J. Now Clinton has been admonished yet absolved from any criminal wrongdoing in her email misjudgment.

Are these two individuals the best the country can come up with to serve the taxpaying, voting public? This will be the first time in 40 years that I feel it is useless to cast a vote.

Bill Toth of Studio City wonders if these are the candidates we deserve:

Unfortunately, the term “lesser of two evils” is not adequate to describe this presidential election.

On the one hand, we have a bigoted, bloviating bully who might not be able to pass a fourth-grade civics test. On the other, we have a pandering liar who’s upside is “at least she is not going to be charged and convicted.”

The bar has been set so low that we are cheering schoolyard taunts and the absence of an indictment. Perhaps these are the candidates we as a society deserve.

Victor Volpe of Camarillo makes a “lesser of two evils” argument:

While Clinton can be characterized as untrustworthy and “extremely careless” when it comes to her handling of her sensitive information sent over email, I am not prepared to vote for a borderline demagogue who divides this nation based on race and religion, demeans women and disabled people, professes patriotic virtues while having avoided military service and has encouraged violent behavior among his supporters.

Clinton’s misdeeds can be held in check by the division in power in our government. Trump’s behavior is damaging to a country that need a consensus to govern such a culturally diverse nation and provide leadership in a world transforming through a globalized economy.

Brea resident Larry Lasseter says Clinton looks good standing next to Trump:

Certainly Clinton’s questionable email practices constituted a major error that did not reflect well on her judgment and also provided fodder for her opponents.

However, in comparing the presidential readiness of the presumptive Republican and Democratic nominees, the serial deceit of the braying buffoon that is Trump makes Clinton look like Mother Teresa.

Follow the Opinion section on Twitter @latimesopinion and Facebook