To the editor: Although I admire the passion of the California delegates for Sen. Bernie Sanders who insist on fighting all the way to the Democratic National Convention, I do feel a great sense of frustration and anxiety that they could be responsible for the defeat of Hillary Clinton. (“Sanders' delegates in California cling to their dream, unfazed by math,” June 20)

And I place the blame for this directly in the hands of Sanders and his campaign manager Jeff Weaver. With every passing day these men are losing the respect of Democrats. They would do well to follow the fine example set by Clinton in 2008 and acknowledge to their delegates that Sanders has no chance.

The president, vice president and even Sen. Elizabeth Warren (D-Mass.), the original Bernie Sanders, have all endorsed Clinton.

See the most-read stories this hour >>

The Sanders campaign accomplished more than anyone dreamed it could or would. Its members can leave with their heads held high — but first they must leave.

Marcia Herman, Los Angeles

..

To the editor: I have been a dedicated Democrat for the last 12 years and have been active both in my local Democratic club and in the California Democratic Party (CDP). Currently, I am secretary of the CDP’s Business and Professional Caucus.

I was really disturbed to hear the negative rhetoric of Sanders’ supporters at Sunday’s executive board meeting in Long Beach. Not only did they boo Environmental Caucus Chairwoman R.L. Miller, who is one of the most progressive people I know, but they also threatened to disrupt the national convention and cause Clinton to lose in November.

It is past time for Sanders to give up his failed campaign and show real leadership by endorsing Clinton and unifying the Democratic Party.

Sue Gunther, Newbury Park

Follow the Opinion section on Twitter @latimesopinion and Facebook

MORE FROM OPINION

Brexit would be a disaster for Britain

Can Brazil protect the Olympic Games and its own citizens?

Obama won't admit it, but the fight against Islamist radicalism will last generations