To the editor: Last year, my organization brought Setsuko Thurlow, a survivor of the U.S. atomic bombing of Hiroshima, to Santa Barbara to honor her for her lifetime of advocacy for the abolition of nuclear weapons. Thurlow and so many other survivors have dedicated their lives to abolishing nuclear weapons so nobody will again suffer as they did.

This is the real lesson of Hiroshima. For the White House to propose a modest speech about the importance of nuclear nonproliferation during the first visit to that city by a sitting president is cowardly and misses the point completely. ("Obama will be first U.S. president to visit Hiroshima — but he'll make no apologies," May 10)

Yes, it is important that no additional nations acquire nuclear weapons. But the story of human suffering that Hiroshima tells makes it clear that the 15,000-plus nuclear weapons in the arsenals of a handful of countries must be abolished with urgency.

There exists an international legal obligation to pursue — and bring to a conclusion — negotiations on nuclear disarmament. President Obama should dedicate the final months of his presidency to fulfilling this long-delayed obligation. That would be a legacy worth creating.

Rick Wayman, Santa Barbara

The writer is director of programs for the Nuclear Age Peace Foundation.

..

To the editor: The president's visit to Hiroshima is a disservice to the members of the Greatest Generation who fought and died in World War II. U.S. Ambassador to Japan Caroline Kennedy and Secretary of State John Kerry have already visited, which is more than enough. When was the last time a high-ranking Japanese dignitary visited Pearl Harbor?

My husband, who was shot by a Japanese sniper on Okinawa, must be turning in his grave.

Marianne Bobick, Long Beach

..

To the editor: Now that Obama is showing the way by visiting Hiroshima, I suggest that from now on it becomes mandatory for all our elected lawmakers to visit this site before taking office. It will be an educational experience for them and perhaps inspire them not to be so ready to use our numerous nuclear weapons.

Empty words and apologies may be skipped. Acts to eliminate these weapons are meaningful and must be started by the United States.

Obama must demonstrate that he is sincere by scrapping the multibillion-dollar budget proposal for “upgrading” and “modernizing” our nuclear arsenal. He must also get rid of the weapons we have.

Theodore Polychronis, Glendale

..

To the editor: If Obama's trip to Hiroshima is “no apology,” then what is it?

There have been lots of civilians killed in war. In Japan during World War II, greater numbers were incinerated during the Allied bombings of Tokyo than were killed in Hiroshima. An enormous number of Chinese were raped, tortured and murdered by the Japanese in Nanking.

Why single out Hiroshima as deserving of a visit?

Arthur O. Armstrong, Manhattan Beach

Follow the Opinion section on Twitter @latimesopinion and Facebook