To the editor: Regarding The Times' coverage of Bernie Sanders' recent caucus wins in the West: While I agree that no one should be assumed the nominee of the party until all votes are counted, let's look at exactly how many votes were counted. (“Trumped-up turnout,” March 31 and “This time, Trump may be at a turning point,” April 1)

Take Alaska. All of 500-plus Democrats turned out for the entire caucus.

Hawaii adds further evidence of the undemocratic nature of caucuses. Again, an extremely small percentage of registered Democrats took part. A great victory for Sanders and his revolution.

And as for Washington state, not even 30,000 Democrats participated.

Caucuses make it extremely difficult for most people to exercise their right to vote. A candidate with a small group of dedicated followers can distort the true preference of all Democrats. This contrasts greatly with states holding primaries; more than

1.5 million Democrats turned out in Florida (a must-win state) and about two-thirds voted for Hillary Clinton.

I find that many of Sanders' policies belong in Fantasyland, not Tomorrowland, because they stand zero chance of being enacted by a Republican Congress. But I would vote for him if he got the Democratic nomination.

Our differences as Democrats are small compared to our differences with those who are enemies of progress, our rights and of the lives we aspire to.

Chris Gragg, Los Angeles

::

To the editor: At last, Donald Trump may be falling on his own petard. His latest blurt-outs about abortion and use of nuclear weapons in Europe — just to mention a few — may be the final straw in breaking his political back. If he fails to secure the nomination of his badly damaged party, it may well be his own miscues and total lack of preparation and insight that finally do him in. The polls, which are his obsession, are now telling him that he doesn't have a prayer of winning in November.

That's bad news for him, but great news for America.

Bette Mason, Corona Del Mar

::

To the editor: I have lost count of all the above-the-fold articles you've run on that megalomaniac Republican presidential candidate. The Times is wasting way too much space on this buffoon.

Isn't someone starving somewhere? What about those young girls kidnapped by Boko Haram? What are things like in Iraq and Afghanistan at this time? What's going on with Doctors Without Borders? There are loads of important, interesting topics to report on. I've had enough of this drivel.

Lynda Obershaw, Pasadena

::

To the editor: Trump stated that if abortion is illegal then women getting an abortion will have to face a punishment.

This was the “politically incorrect” answer but is the logical answer. If a person violates a law, without a punishment, the law will be ignored. Trump was just not familiar with the artful response created by the anti-abortion lobby. Trump later changed his position to the acceptable response that the person performing the abortion will be punished, not the woman.

This structured response is an attempt to make abortion illegal and still get women to vote for the ban and those who support the ban.

Norwood Price, Burbank

::

To the editor: Whether the Trump Nation understands it, supporting Trump is an intentional or unintentional vote for racism, bigotry, religious intolerance, misogyny, torture, and disrespect for the law. It's mind boggling to read how easily many Trump supporters deny Trump's — and their own — bigotry. I'd much rather have a hard-working undocumented worker as a neighbor than someone from Trump nation.

Ray McKown, Los Angeles

Follow the Opinion section on Twitter @latimesopinion and Facebook