To the editor: It's difficult to understand the letter writers' complaints about fees requested by electric utilities from customers producing their own solar power. ("Solar energy and utilities' outdated way of doing business," Readers React, Jan. 31)

Most of them continue to rely on utilities for at least some of their power needs, because the sun doesn't shine at night or their needs exceed their ability to produce. Regardless of how much or how little power solar customers need from the grid, the reality is that utility infrastructure and generation have to be there to serve them at any time if they are customers. Do they expect others to pay their costs?

I suggest people complaining about the fees for solar customers consider disconnecting from the grid to see how that works for them, without any utility services or any utility costs.

Harvey Barkan, Studio City

..

To the editor: The electrical grid in this country is a benefit to everyone, regardless of how much or how little electricity they consume. It makes possible our security, commerce, entertainment and lifestyle in general.

Unlike the network of highways and roads that are supported and maintained through taxes collected in various ways, the electrical grid in this country is (mostly) owned, operated and maintained by private investor-owned utilities and is not supported through any taxation system. It behooves us to find an equitable way to ensure that a benefit that we all enjoy continues to have a revenue stream adequate for its continued reliable operation.

Arguments such as “I have solar panels, so I should not have to pay for a share of grid operations and maintenance” ignore the larger benefit to our society of a reliable electrical grid. The transition to renewable energy sources will not replace the need for a robust electrical grid.

(For the record, though these opinions are my own, they were informed by a 35-year career with Southern California Edison.)

Richard Schmittdiel, Glendale

Follow the Opinion section on Twitter @latimesopinion and Facebook