To the editor: Right after reading your editorial, I watched a news conference with President Obama and Prime Minister Lee Hsien Loong of Singapore.

These two statesmen, and many other world leaders, regularly show prepared and often off-the- cuff eloquence, class and deep knowledge of world conditions and facts. (“It’s time to repudiate Trump,” Editorial, Aug. 2 and “Self-induced trouble,” Aug. 2)

I shudder when I try to picture Donald Trump representing my beloved country in similar situations.

Jordan Austin, Port Hueneme

..

To the editor Self-induced trouble, my foot. Trump is not struggling to do damage control, he is reveling in it. Cleverly timed damage gets front-page coverage from The Times and 10 minutes or more in every television newscast.

He gets all the publicity he needs and does not pay a dime. The business model is to assail people others admire and set off an endless stream of attention.

We didn’t hear much about Chelsea Clinton and many convention speakers because Trump grabbed all the attention by making crude comments about a war hero’s family.

Quit “buying” his baloney with absurd attention.

Sally Cook, Camarillo

..

To the editor: Bravo to The Times for your editorial.

It is inconceivable to me that so many of our citizens listen to and seemingly accept his rants and raves and don’t see through to the disaster a Trump presidency would bring to our country and our standing in the world. Let’s hope they wake up before November.

David B. Housh, Glendora

..

To the editor: Self-induced trouble for Donald Trump? Deliberately self- induced seems more appropriate.

Trump is an intelligent person, so why is it that almost every time he says something, he is further alienating himself from many in his own party?

Either he is too stupid to realize what he is doing, which I don’t believe for a minute, or he hasn’t been able dissuade his loyal followers to turn against him.

Why would he continue this “tactic” if he really wants to be elected? Has it all been a farce from the beginning? Did he overestimate the intelligence of his followers? Is the Donald doing and saying all he can to lose so that he will not be obligated to serve a job he desperately does not want?

Bob Murtha, Santa Maria

..

To the editor: Everyone is entitled to make some stupid statements. In his bid to become the next American president, Donald Trump has greatly exceeded his quota of such statements.

The American media deserves credit for informing the American public of the flaws and deficiencies of potential American presidents. It is the goodness of the American political system that allows the American public to reject potential presidents such as Donald Trump.

Marc Jacobson, Los Angeles

..

To the editor: Far be it from me to give the Republican party advice, but the time has come for you leaders to step up to the plate and take your party back from the zealots who have ushered in Donald Trump as your candidate for president.

Of course, that means giving away the 2016 election, but putting country before party affords you the unprecedented opportunity to actually be patriotic, end the bid of this (choose your adjective) charlatan, and start the hard work you’ll all need to do to assure a one term Clinton presidency. In short, do the right thing.

Richard Roswell, Burbank

..

To the editor: Asking Republican leaders to repudiate their nominee is a little like asking the scientist Victor Frankenstein to repudiate his creation despite the fact that he is repulsed and afraid of him. The GOP created the monster that is now Donald Trump, and now he is terrorizing the electorate with his bizarre brand of electioneering. We can only hope the damage to our political landscape will not be as devastating as in the novel.

Tim Geddes, Huntington Beach

Follow the Opinion section on Twitter @latimesopinion and Facebook