To the editor: Doyle McManus inadvertently highlights what could be the reason the average, fair-minded Joe has a feeling that President Obama is just not quite capable. ("Obama's legacy depends on the 2016 election," Opinion, Dec. 27)

McManus notes that Obama had a pretty good 2015 by most measures. The economy grew and unemployment fell. He achieved a long-sought nuclear deal with Iran and a long-sought climate agreement in Paris. He even signed some bipartisan legislation, including an old-fashioned compromise over spending and taxes.

This kind of favorable commentary is never printed in large type on the front page where most people will notice it. It's usually in the Opinion or Business sections in compound, complex sentences, which hinders understanding for some and may even lead to resentment.

Donald Trump, on the other hand, attracts those who like simple, declarative pronouncements.

Albert V. Weaver, Newbury Park

..

To the editor: McManus' column on Obama's low approval rating and its impact on the 2016 election omits one key fact: The president probably loses at least five percentage points because he is African American.

In what is supposedly a post-racial era, I have seen blacks regularly denied taxicabs, heard white landlords repeatedly complain about their black tenants, and in one disturbing incident, had a white colleague complain about the language skills of an African American hire I made — a gentleman who holds a master's in business from UCLA. That was just a couple of years ago.

And of course, the number of stories in recent years about police shootings and school suspensions against people and students of color reinforces the fact that prejudice in this country remains widespread.

I have yet to see journalists or pundits discuss whether Obama's racial background contributes to what has been an approval rating that is quite low given the performance of the economy and his overall accomplishments. It is time to stop avoiding this issue.

Ron Shinkman, Sherman Oaks

Follow the Opinion section on Twitter @latimesopinion and Facebook