To the editor: We in America need to get used to the reality that a great many of our fellow citizens are just fine with racism, sexism, coarseness, vulgarity, reckless braggadocio, childish temperament and utter lack of qualification — and these people are thrilled finally to have found a candidate who represents them. ("Donald Trump defiant as GOP leaders fight to stop him," March 6)

It's sad and so telling that the Republican establishment isn't opposed to Donald Trump because of these obvious disqualifications, but because he isn't sufficiently conservative. If he toed the party line, it'd be thrilled with him.

If Trump wins the presidency, he won't drown the government in a bathtub, as some top Republicans have said they want. But he won't have to: The government will die of sheer humiliation.

Barbara Carlton, El Cajon

..

To the editor: To watch Thursday night's wrestling match of a Republican presidential candidate debate was to catch a glimpse of the sheer genius of Mike Judge's 2006 comedy “Idiocracy,” where the United States has crumbled into a dim-bulb netherworld of absolute morons.

The childish bully antics of Trump managed to pull the other “serious” candidates down to his boorish level, the four of them pelting each other with fistfuls of verbal sand in pathetic attempts to garner the cheers of their own knuckle-dragging portion of the audience.

While no fan of Fox News, I couldn't help but feel sorry for the three hosts who did their best to soldier on, attempting to bring some level of respectable discourse to this sorry affair, each frequently booed and heckled for having the audacity to ask fair-minded but never softball questions, the type an informed electorate should welcome when vetting the highest office in our nation.

Sadly, what we saw was a national embarrassment.

William P. Bekkala, West Hollywood

..

To the editor: Iowa blogger Craig Robinson is quoted as saying, “It's basically saying there are elites in the party that will tell us which candidates are acceptable, and which are not, and their opinion trumps the will of the people.”

Well, yeah. Like all good children, Rush Limbaugh's “dittoheads” and Sean Hannity's and Glenn Beck's acolytes have been listening to daddy Fox News for years. Now they're acting like they just learned there's no Santa or tooth fairy.

The will of the people has never been part of the Republican equation. It's all been a cynical power game they were playing — and now they're losing and desperate.

The will of the people indeed.

Barry Davis, Agoura Hills

..

To the editor: I'm upset that my party “leaders” are touting alternates to Trump.

I've voted for president 15 times. I carefully study all candidates before marking my ballot. This seems to be a year for the silent majority to shake up K Street and look out for Main Street.

Listen, party leaders: We like Donald!

Thomas Berge, San Gabriel

..

To the editor: Trump said, “They're not going to refuse me, believe me,” when asked if the military would follow his orders, even if illegal.

First it was hate-mongering, and now it's a dictator's use of the military. So I have to ask Mike Godwin, of Godwin's Law fame, “Why can't I compare Trump to Hitler?”

Bill Weber, La Cañada Flintridge

Follow the Opinion section on Twitter @latimesopinion and Facebook