To the editor: I am completely unsympathetic to independent supporters of Bernie Sanders in New York who can't vote in that state's Democratic primary ("Sanders faces a hard reality in New York: Some of his most ardent backers can't vote for him," April 15) and to people in California who mistakenly registered for the American Independent Party. ("Are you an independent voter? You aren't if you checked this box," April 17)

If you aren't a registered Democrat — or Republican, or Green Party member, or a member of any other party — you shouldn't be allowed to vote for that party's nominee. There is nothing “suppressive” about refusing to allow people who say they don't want to be known as Democrats to decide that party's nominee.

As for those Californians who registered with the AIP, right above the box they checked it says, “Yes, my political party preference is:” and to the left it says, “No, I do not want to choose a political party.” If you can't read the registration form correctly, how informed a voter are you?

Angela Sousa, Los Angeles

..

To the editor: California Secretary of State Alex Padilla may be correct when he states, “My office isn't in the business of censoring or amending a political party's name,” regarding widespread voter confusion over the AIP.

One thing Padilla can and should control is the wording of the “No” box on the voter registration form. In addition to the caveat in parenthesis about a voter being unable to vote in some parties' primaries, the note could also include this (pulled verbatim from your article): “Only those who check ‘No' are considered independent of all parties,” perhaps adding, “or what is more commonly known and understood as registering as an independent voter.”

It could be even simpler: “Check this ‘No' box if your intention is to register as an independent voter.”

Ged Kenslea, North Hollywood

..

To the editor: “Demi Moore is not, nor has ever been, a member of the American Independent Party.”

Somewhere, I imagine the spirits of George Santayana and Joe McCarthy are sitting together at a cafe reading that particular response to this “investigation” of liberal celebrities' AIP registrations and having a really good laugh.

Michael Poloukhine, Los Angeles

Follow the Opinion section on Twitter @latimesopinion and Facebook