To the editor: First, it's hard to imagine Palestinians thinking Republican presidential candidate Donald Trump or anyone who has proposed banning Muslims from entering the United States is neutral. By the same token, his words also seem to deny Israel the right to the same actions he proposes for U.S. protection against terrorism. ("Believe it or not, Donald Trump is right on neutrality in the Israeli-Palestinian conflict," editorial, March 23)

Second, consider Trump's words recently to the American Israel Public Affairs Committee: “A deal is really something that when we impose it on Israel and Palestine, we bring together a group of people that come up with something.”

That's not a deal and it is not our place to impose anything on Israel or Palestine. If an agreement is to be reached, such an agreement must be negotiated by Israel and the Palestinians. We might help to bring the two sides together or even offer realistic suggestions or proposals, but it is not our place to create or otherwise impose a deal.

Such an imposition would be doomed from the outset.

Michael Solomon, Canoga Park

..

To the editor: By accident or design, Trump is right on target in saying he wants to be neutral in the Mideast peace process. It is impossible for the U.S. to be neutral, considering our nearly 70-year support of Israel and the recent pronouncements in front of AIPAC by the presidential candidates of both parties of their undying commitment to that country.

The Arab world does not accept the U.S. as neutral when it comes to Israel, and for good reason. You cannot be a referee in a fight if you own part of a fighter.

Ernest Salomon, Santa Barbara

..

To the editor: While I agree that the United States needs to show more impartiality, I am disturbed that you fail to mention that Democratic presidential candidate Sen. Bernie Sanders (I-Vt.) also advocated a more balanced approach, one that recognizes the legitimate rights and concerns of Palestinians as well as the security needs of Israel.

As a Jew who lived in an Israeli kibbutz, Sanders speaks with much more authority than any of the other candidates. He believes that “Israel and the Palestinians can, and should, peacefully co-exist, and that Palestinians should have a country of their own.” He is not a big fan of Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu, and he believes in diplomacy, not war, with Iran.

Sanders' balanced foreign policy could be a game changer in the Middle East, where military solutions have failed.

Anthony Manousos, Pasadena

Follow the Opinion section on Twitter @latimesopinion and Facebook