To the editor: Three cheers for Steve Lopez’s article on Gov. Jerry Brown’s silence on the California Coastal Commission’s “fishy business.” Brown and the commissioners deserve to be taken to task. ("Gov. Brown, notice anything fishy about your Coastal Commission?" May 18)

In fairness to Brown, however — whose public approval rating overall is 56% and 77% among Democrats, according to a January Field Poll — it may be that our governor is doing what the public wants by refusing to rein in the commissioners. For example, both Brown and likely Democratic presidential nominee Hillary Clinton favor fracking (Clinton has several conditions) as well.

Environmentalists are fighting an uphill battle on many issues, or so it seems to me.

Gene Rothman, Culver City

..

To the editor: Nobody, and I mean nobody, has worked harder than Lopez on the Coastal Commission story, but I have to quote my mentor Foghorn Leghorn: “Son, I see you chopping, but they ain’t no chips flying.”

I’ve got to conclude one of three things: Lopez is completely wrong about how the commission operates; Brown is a craven, corrupt politician; or the power of the pen is a completely oversold fiction by writers and journalists.

I mean, how much more could The Times do to expose an injustice? Steve has been busting his butt on the front page of the California section for months and has had all the traction of a moped on the surface of an ice pond on a warm spring day. I hope something comes of it in the future, and I believe in the the Coastal Commission's charter, but honestly, could the effort so far be any less effective?

David Pohlod, Oak Park

..

To the editor: Kudos to Lopez and The Times for keeping the ongoing Coastal Commission misfeasance in the public eye. If our governor continues to keep his head in the sand, he’d better start listening for the approaching bulldozers.

It’s a real shame and disappointment that Brown, who once was called Gov. Moonbeam, will never be known as Gov. Coast Guard.

Ron Harris, West Hollywood

Follow the Opinion section on Twitter @latimesopinion and Facebook