To the editor: Sidewalks are only present on one side of the street on which I live — my side. The other side has lawns that extend to the street. (“Fixing broken sidewalks,” Editorial, March 27)

So, when the city gives me the responsibility for maintaining sidewalks in front of my house, can I tear them out and plant grass?

It seems unfair otherwise.

Barbara Siegman, Van Nuys

::

To the editor: Property owners would have little problem with fixing their own sidewalks, and many likely would have done so already, if the city did not make it so difficult to do.

Have you ever tried to get a permit to do a simple project like this?

The city makes it virtually impossible. What in many cases would be a weekend project to cut some tree roots and lay some concrete is, to the city, like trying to build a skyscraper.

Eliminate the ridiculous regulations — it is just a sidewalk, people! — and most property owners would take care of these repairs themselves anyway.

Jeffrey C. Briggs, Hollywood

::

To the editor: The solution for fixing our broken sidewalks is a misguided effort by the city of Los Angeles to shirk its responsibilities to its citizens.

When I purchased my home, the sidewalk in front of my house was not part of the “deed.” Nor, may I add, was the sycamore tree that sits on the grassy strip adjacent to the sidewalk. Now, I am expected to maintain this public sidewalk? How ridiculous.

May I ask what property taxes are for? Are these large sums that homeowners contribute to the city budget each year not allocated for public sidewalk maintenance and repair? Would I get a reduction in my property tax if I maintain this public sidewalk? Why would I pay for something that I do not own?

May I also ask about the large potholes in the street in front of my home that are also not repaired by the city? Will I soon be asked to take on this maintenance as well? Is this also not budgeted from our property tax dollars? Where does it end?

Peter David Harris, Los Angeles

::

To the editor: The local government, city — or county if an unincorporated area — should be responsible for sidewalk repairs. They are public right of ways, just like roadways.

I am a retired government employee, but I believe governments must maintain their property and prioritize that over new programs, wage increases and other “new” expenses.

Peter Green, Santa Clara

Follow the Opinion section on Twitter @latimesopinion and Facebook