This will be the first and final time you read the name Omar Mateen in this column. For many letters writers, that’s one mention too many.

Since 49 people were brutally shot and killed at a gay nightclub in Orlando early Sunday morning, the name of the killer has been conspicuously absent from all but a handful of the hundreds letters that discuss the massacre. In fact, the few letter writers who focus on the shooter do so to scold the media, including The Times, for repeatedly publishing his now-infamous selfies.

These complaints are similar to ones made after the mass shooting in San Bernardino last December; for weeks readers implored The Times to stop printing photos and articles that they said unintentionally glorified the killers.

Hirbod Rashidi of Los Angeles says media attention motivates would-be killers:

Why do these terrorists do what they do?

By plastering their pictures all over TV, in newspapers and online, and repeating their names, the Fourth Estate bears some responsibility for their perceived immortality in this life. Fellow terrorists and their supporters already are turning them into rock stars, so we don’t need to assist them further in turning these losers into overnight celebrities.

Therefore, unless there is a law enforcement-related necessity, the media must stop turning these savages into celebrities. I understand that the names of the terrorists are newsworthy; perhaps even their pictures have some relevance. But the problem occurs when the media — often in the quest to provide 24 hours of “news” — go overboard.

Lakewood resident Diane Baum speculates (correctly) that other readers share her concern:

I know I’m not alone when I ask The Times not to show photographs of the Orlando shooter for the next six months.

That photo of the San Bernardino terrorists ran for months. Just when I thought you were done, it would appear again. Their faces physically sickened me.

Now we have images of this Orlando shooter taking a selfie, and he appears to be in love with himself. We all can do without the photo. For that matter, let’s just call him the killer and not tempt others who have a twisted idea of fame.

Christine Roberts of Riverside speaks up for the victims — including the killers’ families:

Members of all media should refuse to state the names of those engaged in mass murder or terrorist acts.

The Times could have referenced other shootings without naming the perpetrators but, once again, gave them another brief moment of “fame.” The public can get the killers’ details, even their biographies, without having to read their names.

This kind of restraint would protect the perpetrators’ family members, who are usually innocent and, therefore, also victims. Those whom we find to be inhuman, lacking the most basic respect for the lives of others, do not deserve to be named along with their innocent victims.

Follow the Opinion section on Twitter @latimesopinion and Facebook