To the editor: Michael Hiltzik's reasons for supporting California's bullet train are perplexing. He lays out all the valid arguments as to why this unnecessary and wasteful project should not be built. Then in some weird about-face, he concludes that “it's necessary.” ("The bullet train is troubled, but it's necessary," March 4)

I don't follow. It's like laying out all the bad health effects caused by obesity and then concluding, “It's necessary.”

I frequently drive to Northern California through the Central Valley and have never encountered heavy traffic, except once when it was very foggy. Is there some transportation crisis on roads between Northern California and Los Angeles that I do not know about? Otherwise, it's pretty easy and cheap to travel this route.

The $64 billion or whatever it the system ends up costing would be better spent on repairing our ailing highways, roads and bridges. Better would be to improve California's water infrastructure.

Cindy Bloom, Shadow Hills

..

To the editor: As one who traveled on the bullet train in China, I fully agree with Hiltzik that California's system should be expeditiously built according to the original plans.

The Shanghai-Beijing trip is about 800 miles and takes about five hours.The highest speed, displayed on the monitor, was about 200 miles per hour. A trip costs about $100, and the journey was very quiet and comfortable, unlike economy class on plane.

An important convenience of the trip was that the terminals in both Shanghai and Beijing are connected to each cities' very efficient subway systems.

My suggestion to the most influential political opponents of the bullet train is to take a ride on the Shanghai-Beijing line, just like Gov. Jerry Brown did.

Gabor Tamasi, Malibu

..

To the editor: Hiltzik makes a strong argument for the bullet train, comparing that system to needed projects such as the Hoover Dam.

He also makes an interesting comment about “creative interpretation” of the stipulations used to sell the voting public on building the train. It is these creative interpretations that worry not only opponents but also former supporters.

We have had enough creative interpretations on other projects, and enough is enough.

Carlos Ferreyra, Valley Glen

..

To the editor: In his column enumerating the issues surrounding the bullet train, Hiltzik unintentionally sheds light on another current major issue: the rise of Donald Trump.

Hiltzik quotes Willie Brown, former Assembly speaker and ex-mayor of San Francisco, as saying, “If people knew the real cost [of a project] from the start, nothing would ever be approved.” In other words, we politicians know what's good for you, and we're going to feed it to you, like it or not.

Is it any wonder taxpayers are fed up with the professional political class?

Louis H. Nevell, Los Angeles

Follow the Opinion section on Twitter @latimesopinion and Facebook