To the editor: Sometimes we hear the question: “What good is government?”

Your articles on the wage hike and 401(k) plans show how government can impact huge numbers of people; in fact, millions here in California. The numbers are almost staggering. The wage hike, for example, will help 5.6 million workers, while the 401(k) plan could help 6.8 million workers.

(“Wage hike deal heads for debate,” March 29, “Will a $15 wage be approved?” March 29, and “State weighs 401(k)-type plan,” Business, March 29)

These numbers are huge, and so helpful for workers at the bottom. This is the good that government can do.

Terry Kennedy, Gardena

::

To the editor: The increase in the state's minimum wage will not only benefit more than 5 million workers, it is also long overdue.

The argument from Republicans that thousands of workers will lose their jobs is complete nonsense. Our economy is in full recovery and companies will not fire employees they need to continue to make high profits. And before you feel sorry for wealthy businesses, remember that this increase to $15 an hour will occur over several years.

Ralph S. Brax, Lancaster

::

To the editor: As a business owner, I understand the angst about raising the minimum wage, but it will result in people living better and, hopefully, it will create more demand for goods and services.

What California businesses should be uniting against is being gouged by oil refiners that siphon billions of dollars from the economy, and Southern California Edison for sticking it to ratepayers. The money is there; it's a question of who gets it.

Rene Kaprielian, San Diego

::

To the editor: Another step in the wrong direction. You cannot achieve economic growth, jobs and personal income growth by legislating an increase in the minimum wage. You need a business plan that creates investment and jobs. California does not have a business plan. California has a legislative plan that continues to penalize versus incentivize.

Until California elects politicians who focus on creating a positive investment environment for all businesses and not pandering to the special-interest groups, we will continue to waste time and resources on wasteful programs, burdensome regulations and increased bureaucracy that do not deal with the root cause of bringing manufacturing and investment back.

A real business plan would incorporate tax incentives for relocation, long-term tax reductions, fast-track approval of investments, etc.

Don Black, Rancho Palos Verdes



Follow the Opinion section on Twitter @latimesopinion and Facebook